===== Book page 381 =====
OceanofPDF.com
===== Book page 382 =====
Management is an iterative process. We learn as we go, and we
hopefully learn from one another’s examples, but it’s generally hard
to get it right without a lot of practice.
I find managers often fall somewhere on a continuum between
the “extreme coach” and the “forgot-to coach.” The extreme coach
spends too much time involved in the day-to-day, providing endless
feedback. The forgot-to coach is often very clear about what results
they want to see but is unclear on how to help their direct reports
achieve them. Most managers fall somewhere in between. In my
experience, many managers wait too long to offer coaching—often
until a formal performance conversation—unless the direct report
specifically asks for feedback or help on work. This may be because
coaching involves a certain amount of risk—you’re offering
judgment on someone else’s work and skills.
Some executive coach coined the phrase “Feedback is a gift,” and
though it feels cloying to say, I do think the manager’s attitude needs
to be one of service. You may not be an expert in everything a
person is doing, but your role is to help them be better. To do that,
you need to offer service in the form of observations about what
they do well and how they can improve.
One of the best manager coaches I ever had was Paul Bascobert,
a partner at the consulting firm I joined out of business school. He
wasn’t my direct manager, but he was very involved in most of the
projects I was a team member on, and he was the key partner on an
engagement where I ultimately helped sell the project and led the
team. Paul’s original training was as an engineer, and he had a
certain matter-of-fact directness that I’ve come to appreciate and
that many engineers share. Sometimes the coaching was not so
helpful: We once handed him a draft presentation we’d prepared for
our client and he rifled through it, took out a pen, flipped back to the
===== Book page 383 =====
front page, and wrote, “Think harder,” then handed it back to us.
Not very detailed feedback—but he did set the bar high.
Paul’s best coaching moment happened in the early days of the
project I was leading. As you can imagine, I was more than eager to
prove myself and my new team. In a practice run before we met with
the client’s executive sponsor, we sat with Paul and presented our
proposed project scope and work streams. Well, really, I presented
the scope and work streams. The practice session went fine, but
afterward Paul asked to speak with me in his office. I was hoping for
some praise on our good start or a few constructive comments
about our work streams, but instead Paul asked me, “How did you
think that went?”
I was puzzled. I said, “I think we’re ready, right?” In response, he
said, “What do you think Teresa was thinking?” Teresa (not her real
name; all team members’ names have been changed) was the most
junior member of the project team. I was stumped. He said, “Okay,
what about Mike?” Mike was the technical member of our team and
was responsible for a key element of the project. Again, I was
baffled. This went on for some time, with Paul asking me about each
project member in turn and how I thought they had experienced the
meeting. Eventually, Paul weighed in: “Teresa wanted you to
acknowledge her work. And Mike would have liked to present his
work stream, not you.”
I’ll never forget that. Paul’s coaching was not about the substance
of the presentation but about my failure to be the leader my team
needed, to offer them recognition and a chance to share their work.
How would I get this new team behind me, and how would they buy
into me as their leader, if I didn’t acknowledge their contributions
and if I took all the best opportunities for myself?
===== Book page 384 =====
During my entire early career in multiple organizations, I never
had a formal performance review. But I learned a lot in moments like
that one. I remember once, as deputy campaign manager for a
gubernatorial campaign in 1998, I walked into the campaign
manager’s office to tell him about a big problem I’d discovered. He
listened and said, sarcastically, “Wow. Has no one ever faced this
problem before?” I’d come in with a problem but not done one bit of
work to propose some solutions!
Some years later, my first formal performance review at Google
was a revelation. I knew what my areas for development were—
thanks to feedback along the way, I’d become quite attuned to what I
needed to work on. But what was new to me was the attention paid
to my strengths and how they were perceived. Yes, I had been given
more responsibilities, even promotions, in my work in politics and
consulting. But no one had ever said, “You really have talent.” And
sometimes, especially when the work is unending and hard, you
need to have someone tell you that as part of a formal process. So
here I am, advocating for both regular coaching and formal
performance reviews.
Before we get to performance reviews, let’s talk about informal
feedback and coaching.
To some, business is already too rife with sports analogies. I get
it. But I’m the daughter of a baseball coach—okay, he was a teacher
who happened to coach baseball, but he identified as a coach—and I
grew up watching sports. I don’t necessarily love every minute and
every aspect of the sports I watch, but I love watching the coach and
seeing how the performance of individuals add up, sometimes, to a
true team. It’s one of the few places where you can be in the
audience and observe what happens to people under intense
pressure. I recommend paying attention in those moments.
===== Book page 385 =====
In the Michael Lewis article about Bill Parcells I mentioned in
Chapter 4, Lewis writes, “It’s an elemental thing—that mysterious
something in a player under pressure that either snaps or holds—
and elemental things are what interest this old coach.”67 As a coach,
I’m certainly getting older, and I’ll never tire of trying to figure out a
person’s elemental thing.
Hypothesis-based coaching
One of my favorite coaching techniques is what I call intuitive
coaching. Intuition gets a bad rap, I think. To some, it feels fluffy and
lacking in data. The source of an intuition may be hard to pin down,
but think of it this way: An intuition is just a hypothesis. You
observe a few examples of a phenomenon, and you think, “I wonder
if there’s a pattern here.” Then, like a scientist, you figure out a way
to test your theory and collect more data.
Managers are often afraid to share their hypotheses with their
reports because they think it means they’re judging their people,
which they perceive to be bad management. But good judgment is a
manager’s job! It’s akin to making a business decision: Leaders
create a strategy based on their assessment of a particular business
need, then confirm whether that strategy was successful by
reviewing user interviews, data, and product tests or by going to
market. The same can apply to people: You observe a particular
need, form a hypothesis about what might be the root cause of that
need or a possible solution to it, and then you test the hypothesis,
sometimes directly with the person in question.
When it comes to coaching, I think a lot of managers need to get
to a point where they can feel comfortable implementing Operating
Principle 2: Say the thing you think you cannot say. If you can get
stronger at standing next to the person, seeing from their point of
===== Book page 386 =====
view, and offering observations and hypotheses to help them grow,
that person will view you as someone invested in their success,
ideally a partner. Hypothesis-based coaching is about saying the
thing—making the observation—before you may feel completely
ready, but doing so in such a way that the person experiences you as
an ally in their journey to improve.
Sharing your hypotheses with your reports can initially feel
strange, but as you start integrating this approach into your
management style, you’ll be able to have much more targeted
performance conversations. You can then jointly explore whether
the hunch you have about the root cause of a performance challenge
is true. Sometimes you’ll be wrong, which is in itself a data point.
Oftentimes, you’ll discover an insight that wasn’t initially obvious to
either of you but that ultimately helps your employee.
Hypothesis-based coaching also helps you act quickly rather
than relying on a long process of observation and gathering data on
a person’s performance before coming to a conclusion. It’s like
deductive instead of inductive reasoning. Posit something, then start
talking about it. The sooner you and your report can identify areas
for improvement, the sooner you can start making changes.
The career conversation outlined in Chapter 4 is a great place to
start forming hypotheses about your reports. In fact, they may
volunteer some during the conversation. Once, as I probed a report’s
motivations for a certain career choice, they told me, “I’m always
drawn to the thorniest and riskiest problems, although sometimes I
get a bit too involved in solving them.” That’s not just a data point,
it’s the person’s own hypothesis about a development area. File that
away and bring it back up when the moment is right to coach them
on how they might mitigate a tendency they want to avoid—in this
case, not the part about taking on risky problems but about getting
===== Book page 387 =====
lost in trying to solve something to the detriment of bigger-picture
objectives.
Intuitive coaching consists of three steps, which you may repeat
a few times before getting to an insight you want to share or a firmer
conclusion about a strength or development area your direct report
might have:
Gather data: You have more than you realize and need less than
you think.
Form a hypothesis: Based on your observations of your report,
develop a sense of their strengths and weaknesses.
Test your hypothesis: Be rigorous and vulnerable as you do this.
In the previous example, one data point is the person’s opinion
about their tendency to get too involved in problem-solving. The
next might be your own observation that they’re going too deep into
the details of a particular problem space on a project. Your
hypothesis might be that they lose the forest for the trees and they
need to be more aware of the bigger-picture objective and willing to
use the 80-20 rule: Perhaps understanding 20 percent of the root of
the problem is enough to know 80 percent of what’s needed to move
forward. Your test might be to delegate another, similar project to
the person, or, if you feel more confident—and in this case you
probably should, since the person has raised the concern themselves
—to have a conversation with your report about what you’ve
observed and how you might work on mitigating their tendency to
dive too deep.
Let’s go into more detail about each step:
Gather data
A senior leader—let’s call her Anika—recently asked me to help her
with a situation she faced with one of her reports, whom we’ll call
===== Book page 388 =====
Sonya. Sonya had just been promoted to managing a division, and
multiple managers in her division appeared to be struggling. Anika
had gathered feedback on Sonya from three of Sonya’s direct
reports, but she felt uncomfortable assessing whether the situation
required her intervention with just three data points.
As we discussed the situation, I pointed out that Anika had a lot
more data than she thought. She knew each of those three reports’
roles, and she had worked with them personally. She had context on
their work style, preferences, strengths, and weaknesses. She also
knew the context Sonya was operating in: She was now managing
managers of managers of managers! Plus, we were in the middle of a
global pandemic, and as a result, Sonya’s core responsibilities were
ambiguous and continually changing as we revamped our plans for
the year. When you’re a manager who has only led companies in one
mode, suddenly switching to a different mode can mean you need to
take a different approach as a leader. Sonya’s division wanted more
clarity and direct leadership from her during a time of crisis instead
of her more facilitative style, which was better suited to periods of
growth and expansion.
The bigger point is this: Once Anika studied the situation—she
knew the players, the division, and the broader context—she
realized that she had more like 10 or 15 data points rather than
three. That information was more than enough for her to form a
hypothesis and start coaching.
Form a hypothesis
Based on your observations of your report, you can start to develop
a sense of their strengths and weaknesses and consider any
challenges you’ve observed that may be worth discussing.
Sometimes you’ll form an early assessment of your report and
how they’re performing. Don’t be afraid to use that as your starting
===== Book page 389 =====
hypothesis. For example, in order to help Anika, I read the peer
feedback she had collected about Sonya. With our hypothesis in
mind—that Sonya had been operating more as what business books
might call a “peacetime” leader—a bunch of the data points started
to match up. She was very good at consulting with her teams and
bringing people along in decision-making processes, but her
transition into a manager-of-managers role during a pandemic called
for her to be more of a “wartime” leader.68 In other words, she
needed to be more precise and provide more direction. The peer
feedback indicated that her teams wanted this additional clarity and
increased assurance.
It can take a while to trust your intuition when you start
practicing this kind of coaching. Sometimes you might have trouble
forming a hypothesis, or you might find that the data you’re
collecting suggests conflicting conclusions. If that’s the case, spend
more time collecting data before you form a hypothesis. Over time,
you’ll start to get a sense of whether you need to continue collecting
more data in a given situation or whether it’s time to start testing
your hypothesis. If most of your hypotheses are correct after three
to six months of practicing this form of coaching, you can start to
assume that your manager’s intuition is developing nicely. If your
assessments end up being wrong more often than not, you may need
to spend more time in the data-gathering phase, relying more on
peer feedback and results, and likely spending more time with your
report.
Test your hypothesis
The best way to test your hypothesis is to share it directly with your
report. When you do this, acknowledge that you’re not stating a fact
but presenting a theory about the way they work. You can say, “I’m
testing a hypothesis. Let me know whether it feels right to you.”
===== Book page 390 =====
Present the hypothesis as an observation about their behavior and
the impact it has on their work, not a judgment about who they are
as a person. For example, instead of telling someone, “My guess is
that you’re a bad communicator,” which suggests some absolute
truth about who they are and what they’re good or bad at, it’s much
more effective to say, “I have a theory that you’re not effectively
getting important information across to the right stakeholders. For
example, when we came out of that recent business review, I sensed
that the CMO was unsure about your plans. Did you sense that?”
And, of course, follow up with: “What might you do differently?
How can I help?” Presenting your hunch as an observation or a
theory explains how a report’s behavior impacts the outcome of
their work without passing judgment on them as a person.
It’s easier to test your hypotheses when your reports have strong
self-awareness—our old friend. When they hear your observation,
some folks will easily be able to consider whether it aligns with what
they know about themselves. Others will have more trouble making
that assessment. Take note of how your reports respond to
feedback, and compare their self-descriptions to your and your
team’s observations. If the person’s self-perception is consistently
misaligned with what you and others observe, you’ll need to gather
more data to test your hypothesis. They may have what I call a self-
awareness gap, in which case you’ll need to demonstrate that gap to
them with a lot more detail and data. For example, if you’re worried
that your report isn’t effectively communicating to their teams, you
may want to join some of their team meetings or town halls to get
more insight.
I remember the case of a very talented person who had helped
build a team for the company but was ultimately not promoted to
lead that team due to a self-awareness gap. This person was very
===== Book page 391 =====
strong at certain elements of their role but had a few large weak
spots. They had trouble seeing and articulating the macro strategic
picture and building collaborative relationships, which were big
parts of the role. They received feedback about these development
areas multiple times, but they didn’t seem to hear the message, or
didn’t believe it. Because they were talented, their manager gave
them a leadership opportunity to see if they could overcome their
development areas and use their strengths to shine. Instead, the
project was not successful. When the person received that feedback,
they left the company rather than acknowledge how their refusal to
work on growing their skills had contributed to the project’s
problems.
Remember, your job as a manager is to make the observations
and provide opportunities. The report’s job is to listen and decide to
act. You can’t force these things. In this example, the manager used a
tactic I consider a best practice: Before you promote someone, have
them perform some of the duties they’d have to take on in the role in
order to see how they’ll fare, and see if they’re aware of any gaps in
their abilities. Although it didn’t work out in this example, it’s often
a strong strategy.
Giving hard feedback
Often, your intuition will tell you that you need to give your reports
constructive feedback and highlight areas for improvement.
Constructive feedback can feel hard to deliver because there’s a risk
that you’ll hurt the person’s feelings. To state the obvious, these
types of conversations can elicit very strong emotions: shame,
sadness, disappointment, fear. Framing this conversation properly
will make it much easier to avoid defensive reactions and present
yourself as a collaborator who is dedicated to the person’s success.
===== Book page 392 =====
Be an explorer, not a lecturer
Instead of thinking of your meeting as a hard conversation in which
you’re delivering bad news to a report that they must then react to,
set the conversation up as a partnership: You’re exploring a situation
together. Now you’re an explorer, not a lecturer.
This can be hard to do. After all, you’re initiating this
conversation because you have a hypothesis and you’ve gathered
evidence that there’s a problem to address. You also probably have
some great ideas about how to solve that problem. But if you offer
solutions before you both agree on the problem, there’s a good
chance that you’ll alienate your report. Start by making sure that
you’re both on the same page about the issue at hand. Then, use that
alignment to mutually lay the groundwork for improvement. Just as
people often need to learn from their own mistakes rather than
reading about other people’s errors, a person is much more likely to
successfully evolve their behaviors if the recognition that they need
to change and the idea for how to improve come from themselves,
not from an outside observer.
Your goal is to get your report to think with you about the
problem and start to generate solutions. There are two methods for
getting to this state: asking an open-ended question or sharing an
empathetic observation. This will make it much easier to get into a
curious and collaborative mindset, and it makes it much less likely
that the conversation will get derailed. Framing the discussion this
way also gets you to solutions faster, because both you and your
report are starting from a place of trust and shared understanding
instead of suspicion and differing perspectives.
Let’s look at how these two methods can begin a constructive
feedback conversation if, for example, you think your report did a
===== Book page 393 =====
bad job presenting at the weekly meeting or is underperforming this
quarter:
Option 1: Ask an open-ended question
You might start by asking “How do you think that presentation went
yesterday?” or “How do you think this quarter is going?” These are
good examples of neutral, open-ended questions. Contrast these
with bad examples like “Do you think that meeting could have been
better yesterday?” or “Would you agree that this quarter has not
been going as well as expected?”
The worst questions you can ask are completely closed questions
—ones that can be answered with a yes or no response. These can
get you started on the wrong foot because they signal that you’ve
already made up your mind about how things are going—as in, “Do
you think you’re bad at presenting?” An open-ended question, on
the other hand, begins a dialogue and invites self-reflection. It
doesn’t assume a particular answer but rather indicates that you’re
curious and hoping to explore potential answers, ideally together.
Your report may respond with acknowledgment, such as “I wish I
had been more prepared” or “This wasn’t my strongest quarter to
date.” If that’s the case, you’re starting from a place of shared
understanding and can probe for root causes together and work
through ideas for improvement. But if they respond with denial,
such as “The presentation was pretty good!” or “All’s well,” you may
want to try Option 2.
Option 2: Share an empathetic observation
Sharing an empathetic observation can start the conversation on a
supportive, fact-based footing and will allow you to work on
solutions together. Again, be sure to frame it as a neutral
observation, not a judgment. For example, try telling your report, “I
===== Book page 394 =====
was thinking about that presentation you gave. It was so strong at
the start, but I thought it could have been even more impactful at
the end. What did you think?” If they ask for more information, you
might say, “I noticed your talking points became less concise toward
the end, for example.” Or, if it’s a work delivery issue, you might say,
“I noticed that the last two projects you owned each missed their
deadlines by two weeks. Is there something I can help with?
Something I should know?”
Make the observation supportive, objective, and specific instead
of emotional and generic. More emotional and generic versions
might be “I feel like you’ve gotten a lot worse at making
presentations lately,” or “Things have been slipping for a while,
huh?” Generalities and judgments put people back on their heels,
whereas specific, empathetic observations open a dialogue.
When you share the observation, own it. Make sure the person
knows that you’re not trying to assume their reality; rather, you’re
trying to share your reality with them. Someone once said to me,
“Feedback is just holding up a mirror and describing the image you
see.” You’re not describing what the person actually looks like, just
your perception of them—which may or may not be reality. Own it
as such and involve your report in the conversation. Even if your
report’s reaction isn’t “I totally agree,” stating something as an
observation is a neutral way to start the discussion. You’re simply
reflecting your experience of them, not asking them to confirm your
criticism.
If going directly to an empathetic observation isn’t working, try a
few cycles of reverting to Option 1 and asking an open-ended
question. If the person’s answer is still “I think the presentation was
great!” it may be time to give your own answer: “Huh. My
impression was that it was not that great. For example …” It may
===== Book page 395 =====
take a few rounds before you arrive at a common understanding of
the development area, but it’s nearly always possible. People are
more self-aware than you might expect.
That said, if the person is not self-aware and presenting
additional data doesn’t help close that self-awareness gap, you may
need to make a change. (I cover this in more detail in the section on
managing low performers on page 386.) Someone who is not self-
aware is not necessarily a low performer, but it can be challenging or
even impossible to coach such a person to improve and scale with
their role, so they often become low performers.
Creating a culture of informal feedback
Companies often invest in their formal review processes but forget
to examine their culture of informal feedback: the one-off pieces of
advice or observations that people offer to help their colleagues and
reports in their day-to-day work.
When I joined Stripe, there was a strong—almost too strong—
culture of commenting on one another’s work, and a lot of
transparency on every piece of work product to enable this. When I
say “too strong,” I mean that a lot of the feedback was quite direct
and lived in written comments and Slack messages, which could feel
abrupt and intimidating for new people. With scale, both the amount
of work product a person can absorb and the amount of time others
have to comment on it has waned. But one practice that has
persisted, which is also a form of expressing our “Users first”
principle, is that before anything is sent out to a large group, the
whole company, or anyone externally, we test the content with a
small group for feedback. The people who do this the most are the
CEO and the president: the cofounders. This sets the example for
everyone, from leaders onward. It transmits the value of humility,
===== Book page 396 =====
collaboration, and respect for the time that the reader or viewer
might take to absorb the content once you send it out into the world.
What Stripe does less well is bidirectional, informal feedback. We
haven’t cultivated a fully open culture where people frequently
speak up and say something constructive without necessarily being
asked. I can attribute that to fewer examples set by leaders, to our
rapid growth, and to the fact that new folks lack the confidence to
share feedback, or perhaps to our emphasis on generosity and
kindness to one another. (Again, I think feedback is a kindness, but
not everyone does.) No matter the cause, it’s something for us to
work on.
Companies are well served by taking the time to examine their
culture of feedback. If it’s found wanting, leaders are ultimately the
ones who will steer any changes. That investment is worthwhile
because if your company hasn’t built a strong muscle for informal
feedback, the formal review process can feel very destabilizing.
People go into it not knowing where they stand.
“I really like it when people can disagree with each other,
but you have to create the environment for it. In a
business environment, you need to be brutally honest,
and to be brutally honest you can’t have a culture that’s
brutal.”
—Don Hall, executive chairman and former CEO, Hallmark
To build a healthy feedback culture, model the behavior in both
team meetings and 1:1s. As I mentioned earlier, “Praise publicly and
criticize privately” is a good rule of thumb. This largely holds true,
especially for individuals, but I do make a distinction between team
and individual feedback. Often, team feedback—that is, feedback
about the performance of the team—should be data-driven and can
===== Book page 397 =====
be presented as an honest assessment of how things are going. Your
team should come to expect that you’ll tell them honestly whether
you think they performed well last quarter or whether a project was
executed well. Talking about that publicly, focusing on what you all
learned and what the team can do differently to improve, helps build
an environment of learning and open feedback.
You should also personally solicit and welcome feedback,
especially when you’re still setting the tone of a working relationship
—when new teams are forming norms or when you’re just starting
to manage a new employee. For example, if you’ve just tried out a
new meeting format, set the expectation up front that you want
feedback on how the meeting went. If your team already feels
comfortable sharing ideas, you could do this publicly by going
around the room and asking for feedback. The team may not have
fully built that norm yet, so you can also follow up privately with
individuals.
Asking for feedback
Since the best way to create a culture of feedback is to ask for
feedback yourself, here are some pointers on how to do that openly
and often:
Ask on different occasions and through different forums.
Explicitly ask for feedback in 1:1s, during or after meetings, over
email, and in work sessions. Phrasing the ask as a request for
something you can improve makes it clear to the person that you
actively want the feedback. For example, instead of asking “How
do you think that meeting went?,” you could ask, “What could I
have done differently in that meeting?” Or, in a 1:1, instead of
asking “Is there anything else on your mind?” you could ask,
“What do you think I can do to make this project more
===== Book page 398 =====
successful?” Thank the person for their feedback. Don’t try to
explain the choices you made, or you risk appearing defensive or
sending a signal that the feedback is not welcome or respected.
Normalize the practice of giving feedback. If you were given
feedback in private, consider mentioning this in your next team
meeting. This sets a norm that giving and receiving feedback is
welcome and normal.
Let the feedback sit. When presented with feedback, it’s
tempting to problem-solve or try to explain what happened. I’m
not always the best at refraining from doing this, but I’ve come to
understand that it can sound defensive, even if you don’t mean it
that way. Instead, repeat the feedback to ensure you’ve heard the
other person accurately, then thank them for sharing it. If you do
want help problem-solving, return to the topic at a later time to
ask for their partnership in addressing the issue.
Follow up on the feedback. At a future point, tell the person
who’s given you the feedback whether and how you plan to act
on it. Sometimes you’ll determine that the feedback is valid but
you’ll decide not to prioritize it. Other times you might decide
that you want to dig in more. But even if you don’t act on it, it’s
important that the person knows they were heard.
“I encourage [the team] to give me feedback, good or bad,
in front of others. When they see others doing it to me,
they see the example. I also give them mandatory reading:
The Speed of Trust by Stephen Covey.69
Nothing is personal. We want to make everything open
and transparent.
Initially, some people don’t feel comfortable with this
model. But if you really want to improve and become
