===== Book page 399 =====
more self-aware, you need it. We’ve adopted a lot of this
from Ray Dalio’s Principles book.70”
—Eric Yuan, founder and CEO, Zoom
The formal review process
I’m not a believer in the recent trend of abolishing formal
performance reviews in favor of “continuous feedback.” Although I
do believe continuous feedback—in both directions—is a hallmark
of a strong employee-manager relationship, I don’t think it should
replace a written document. Done right, a formal written review is a
summary of ongoing feedback conversations and a good place to
outline development plans. If your company is growing quickly, it’s
also unlikely that all managers are delivering continuous feedback.
The written review process will catch those cases where not enough
feedback is being shared.
Alongside the written review process, you likely have a
mechanism to assign employees a performance designation or rating
and submit people for promotion to the next job level. If you don’t, I
suggest you build one. When I talk to people at companies that don’t
have formal performance reviews, I often find that promotion and
performance rating processes are still taking place in some form, but
they’re happening behind the scenes—often without the knowledge
of the person being “reviewed.” If employees discover that this is
happening out of sight, it can undermine trust. Instead, your
assessment and recognition processes should be transparent, and
you should guard against them becoming political and ineffective.
To build trust in the performance assessment system, people
need to know how they’re going to be measured, that the
measurement will be considered fairly, and how results will lead to

===== Book page 400 =====
recognition and reward (additional responsibility, promotions, or
compensation increases). To do this, you need:
A talent strategy—this could be as simple as “pay for
performance,” i.e., performance-based compensation rewards
Rubrics for how someone’s performance will be measured—see
the section on job levels and ladders on page 179
Agreement on how to assess results against those rubrics
A program to capture performance feedback and promotion
nominations via written and numeric assessments
A clearly communicated process for calibrating performance
assessments across teams, so that individuals know there’s a
system in place to equalize treatment of people at the same level
in the same role, and more broadly for everyone at that level
across the company
A compensation philosophy and a means for the performance
and promotion processes to feed into any compensation
outcomes
“The people I tend to hire and work with, we tend to be
compassionately blunt with each other. Literally everyone
I work with tends to feel comfortable saying ‘You could
have done that thing better.’
One of the earliest guys I hired to do a bunch of the
management stuff at SocialNet was very frustrated that I
wasn’t enabling him to do the things he needed to do. His
comment was ‘I wouldn’t hire you to run a McDonald’s!’ I
was like, ‘I wouldn’t hire me to run a McDonald’s, either.
It would be a disaster.’

===== Book page 401 =====
Then I asked, ‘Why are you saying that?’ He said, ‘Well,
we need to do this, this, and this, and this in the project
management. And you’re not enabling me to do that.’ I
was like, ‘All right, let’s talk about how we enable you to
do that.’ ”
—Reid Hoffman, partner, Greylock Partners, cofounder and former executive
chairman, LinkedIn
The manager plays a critical role in making sure the process
functions as it should. If you’ve managed well, there are no surprises
—you’re merely documenting the conversations you’ve already had
with your direct report. Ideally, if they’re doing well, you’re also
marking a moment that results in a formal reward like a promotion,
a raise, or a cash bonus. To state the obvious, you should never
promise such an award before the company process has taken place
—you don’t know what the outcome will be! It’s better to talk about
it conceptually and keep coaching your report until you can officially
take action. Still, these processes will hopefully culminate in a
tangible moment of accomplishment for your direct report, which
will be rewarding for both of you.
Minimum viable people processes
Luckily, there are increasingly good tools on the market to help
manage people-related processes. Even better, the newer ones are
more customizable to whatever process you design to best suit your
company.
I remember one early Stripe leadership team offsite where I made
the case for implementing a basic performance process. I explained
that we could spend a lot of time designing something unique and
custom to Stripe but that I thought our time would be better spent
on product priorities and that we should instead implement a basic

===== Book page 402 =====
system as a starting point. This is a good example of when perfect
can be the enemy of good. Oftentimes, seeking perfection in your
performance process results in having nothing at all in place, which
is far worse than having something that’s just fine or good.
To me, the most fundamental elements of a strong formal review
process are performance feedback, calibration, and compensation
structures.
Performance feedback
Performance reviews are formal check-ins to assess how well an
employee has been meeting the responsibilities outlined in their role
charter and laid out at a high level in the job ladder. They can also
help you identify top talent as you scale—a time when it’s especially
critical to understand your talent landscape, and when company
leaders can no longer personally oversee every employee’s work.
“Making someone understand that they’re not just a
number goes a long way, in that they will give something
back to you. I do that with my cooks, and I do that with
my management.
You have to be able to listen. Don’t just be a boss. You
have to be your own leader, but they also have to lead you,
sometimes. I want a director of operations who comes to
me and maybe tells me that I’m wrong, or tells me, ‘Chef, I
think I have something that we need to think about.’ ”
—Dominique Crenn, owner and chef, Atelier Crenn, Michelin three-star restaurant
These reviews can be conducted on various timelines, though
they’re most often completed annually. They often consist of
feedback from peers and direct reports, if the report under review is

===== Book page 403 =====
a manager, in addition to the main content: a manager’s assessment
of the employee’s performance. Performance reviews are a good way
to summarize the coaching intuitions you’ve shared with your
reports about strengths and areas for development.
No matter your company process or timeline, I recommend
managers hold performance review discussions with their reports
semi-regularly—at least quarterly or biannually. As I mentioned
earlier, the company process should mark the point where you
formalize the feedback you’ve already been exchanging with your
reports. This is also a moment to return to your career
conversations 
and 
talk 
about 
your 
employees’ 
long-term
development plans.
Here’s an overview of the core elements of the company process:
Peer reviews
Have the employee select three to five peers to submit brief
feedback; the manager should agree that these are the best peers to
provide input. Some prompts for the peer reviews:
Share a couple sentences on how you work with this individual
and how closely you work together.
Review the relevant job ladder and share which capability you
believe is a strength of your peer and how you’ve observed it in
action.
Share one capability from the job ladder that you think your peer
might improve upon. Provide suggestions on how they might do
so.
Review our operating principles and note which one you feel
your peer most embodies. Provide an example of how they
embody this operating principle.

===== Book page 404 =====
Self-assessment
Simultaneously, an employee should submit their own input, with
prompts like:
Submit a short summary of your top contributions and
accomplishments over the relevant time period.
Share a brief write-up of one capability from the job ladder that
you excel at and what results you achieved using this capability.
Share one area of development from the job ladder and ideas on
how you might improve. Include thoughts on how your manager
could support you and your development.
Manager review
A manager should read these two components and submit their own
feedback, plus a promotion nomination, if applicable. Prompts might
include:
Submit a short summary of your employee’s accomplishments
over the relevant time period.
Briefly discuss which one or two capabilities the employee used
most successfully to achieve their results.
Share at least one area for development and what ideas you have
for the employee to further build their skills and abilities in this
area.
Do you wish to submit the employee for a promotion? (Yes or
no.) If yes, consult the job ladder and share a short write-up on
why you believe they are ready to perform well at the next level.
Share your recommended performance designation for the
employee, such as:
Does not meet expectations
Partially meets expectations

===== Book page 405 =====
Successfully meets expectations
Exceeds expectations
Greatly exceeds expectations
There’s an argument to be made for having even fewer
performance designation categories to simplify the process, such as
“does not meet,” “meets,” and “exceeds.” How you approach your
performance distribution largely depends on how much you want to
differentiate rewards based on performance. It may also depend on
how you plan to identify top talent. If you’re doing so via the
performance review process, adding more performance categories
provides a more nuanced view, especially as you look at individual
performance designations over time. Either way, you may want to
run an additional talent review process using a more comprehensive
rubric for assessing performance and potential,71 since backward-
looking performance is only one component of talent identification.
The peer feedback and employee self-assessment can be
submitted simultaneously. The manager review should be written
after the manager has read the peer and self-assessment feedback.
The manager should then submit their feedback and their
promotion and performance designation recommendations into the
calibration process.
SIDEBAR
—
A manager’s advice for delivering
performance reviews
This section is adapted from a note by Hannah Pritchett, a former
Stripe manager. It was sent to managers in advance of a performance
review cycle, and it’s a nice example of peer-to-peer advice on how to

===== Book page 406 =====
approach the performance review process and lay the groundwork for a
productive review conversation.
Written performance reviews are, by nature, backward-looking, but
they’re most productive when you use them to set the stage for a
discussion about the future. I do this by spending relatively little
time talking through the review and more time focused on how the
person should act on the feedback in the upcoming half. Here’s the
order of operations that I would suggest:
Pre-meeting: Send the review to your report 24 hours in
advance with a short note that asks them to take a look at the
review, come prepared to discuss the feedback, and identify what
they want to achieve looking forward.
During the review meeting:
Review the feedback (10 minutes). I start by asking whether
they had a chance to review the feedback and what they
thought. We then discuss the feedback together. This is a good
time to test your hypothesis about how they’re doing and
what they should work on.
Look to the future (40 minutes). Once we’ve reviewed the
feedback, I ask the person, “Do you feel set up for success?”
Then we spend the remaining time talking through how they
can approach their current work more effectively, what new
projects they need to take on to practice new skills, and how I
can better support them in their development. This is also a
great chance for me to receive open feedback, which keeps the
conversation two-way.
I use this structure to avoid arguments or justifications about
what’s in the review. (If you’re arguing, you’ve already lost.) While I

===== Book page 407 =====
do answer questions about anything unclear, when someone wants
to push back on a point, I acknowledge their perspective but
reframe it to talk about how the next time could go differently.
By redirecting backward-looking comments to forward-looking
discussion, it’s more obvious that the point of a performance review
is to help the person succeed going forward, so people tend to be
more open to really hearing the feedback. I also enjoy these reviews
more, since then they’re more like a conversation than a report
readout and they’re more focused on career development (in tune
with business needs) than just on praise and criticism.
—
Calibration
Once a company has formal performance review practices in place,
it should also have a process by which groups of managers and
leaders compare results across their performance assessments to
seek fairness. This helps managers evaluate whether people at the
same level with the same contribution and output are being assessed
in the same manner, and it helps avoid situations where one
manager gives someone an “exceeds expectations” and a promotion
while another manager gives a person with a similar role and the
same work output and effectiveness a “meets expectations.” This
alignment process is often called calibration, and it should serve as a
check on managers who are too lenient or too tough with their
designations and promotion recommendations. The key is for the
company and the people team to scale this process to the right level
of depth without it becoming too time-consuming or, frankly, too
political. If you’re growing quickly, it will need constant adaptation.
Calibration 
should 
accompany 
any 
formal 
performance
assessment process and should therefore occur on the same timeline
—usually annually, but potentially more frequently if you have

===== Book page 408 =====
biannual performance reviews. You could also allow promotion
nominations to happen twice a year, even if the full 360°
performance review process only occurs once a year. In that case,
you might have two calibration processes: one for “off-cycle”
promotions and one for the 360° process and its accompanying
promotions. These processes should only take a few days to
complete, and they need to occur after managers have submitted
their recommendations but before their reviews, designations, and
promotion decisions are final.
In a larger company, much of the calibration process can be
conducted using data analysis, for example to track average
designations for a given group or promotion percentages between
employees of different genders or remote and non-remote
employees. Leaders and HR can conduct this analysis independently
and follow up with individual teams and divisions if they detect
anomalies. In a small company, calibration usually consists of a roll-
up process in which a leader, perhaps with an HR partner, leads
different sets of managers in discussing the performance
designations and promotion recommendations for related groups of
employees. For example, all of the Level 4 and above managers in
engineering might meet to discuss the Level 3 and below individual
contributor engineers. The Level 4 managers then leave, and the
Level 5 and above managers discuss the Level 4 and below
individual contributors, and so on.
The calibration leader should review the data ahead of time and
look for outliers (one manager who submitted higher performance
designations than all the others, for example), understand the rubric,
and be prepared to push on any irregularities, whether at the team
or individual level. Over time, these meetings should be less about
reviewing each person in detail and more about gut-checking what

===== Book page 409 =====
each designation means, plus finding individual examples so that
every manager can calibrate to what, say, “meets expectations”
means for a certain role and level. When the calibration is done well,
all managers should leave with confidence in their designations or
with action items to re-review certain individuals who may not be
getting assessed similarly to others in their role.
This process can become political in some companies. I think
that’s because it can become a performative litany of managers
discussing every person on their team and justifying their
designations to an audience with a bias toward “winning” approval
for their assessments. Instead, it should be educational and aimed at
achieving broad alignment among managers, supported by data and
a rigorous process of comparison to agree on definitions.
Here are the steps involved in a successful calibration process.
Note that prior to calibration, you’ll need to have established a job
ladder and outlined the expectations for each level. You can then use
a rubric to establish assessment criteria for meeting expectations at
each level, preferably with examples.72
1. Managers submit a draft of their performance reviews,
performance designations, and any promotion nominations.
2. This draft is turned into a packet of information, ideally
generated by your performance tool, that can be consulted by the
calibration group. (See the chapter appendix on page 413 for an
example.)
3. Ensure that a senior leader is prepared to facilitate the
calibration. This primarily involves reviewing the data ahead of
time for any red flags.

===== Book page 410 =====
4. Convene a set of managers who manage similar roles and levels.
Have a facilitator from leadership and the appropriate HR
partner assist and take note of decisions and follow-ups.
5. Remind the group of the types of biases that might surface as you
discuss individuals’ performance and promotion status. Beyond
unconscious bias, be aware of availability, recency, and
confirmation biases, to name just a few.73 Understand and coach
the group on how to avoid each one.
6. Examine the data and take note of which managers have low or
high average designations or nominees for promotion compared
to the group. Discuss whether their team is assessing folks
similarly to the other teams represented in the data.
7. Discuss each level in turn, starting with your Level 1 or entry-
level employees, followed by Level 2, and so on. Scope the
conversation to an individual-by-individual comparison as
needed to get the calibration for each designation right. Make
sure you agree on what it looks like to not meet expectations and
to exceed expectations for Level 1 employees across teams, then
discuss any edge cases. Do the same with candidates for
promotion and their track records to ensure you’re promoting
individuals with a similar impact and skills.
8. Once you start reviewing non-managers who are at the same
level as the managers in the room (e.g., Level 4 and above), start
excusing the more junior managers.
9. Throughout, make changes to the performance designations or
promotion decisions and take note of action items to gather more
data, such as sample work product from a particular individual
whose assessment sparked debate, if needed.

===== Book page 411 =====
10. Do a final review of the data after you’ve made any changes in
order to check for broad parity. If there are follow-up items,
report back to the group shortly afterward. For example: “We
decided not to promote Brian and Sara because we found that
neither of their key projects had shipped. We’ll re-review next
quarter.”
11. Roll up all of the outcomes from the calibration sessions for
senior leadership to review. The senior leadership review session
can ensure that the results across functions broadly align with an
expected distribution (I don’t believe in forced distributions, but
high n counts should result in similar distributions), and that the
percentage of employees being promoted feels equitable and in
line with compensation budgets.
There should also be a check at this stage for data outcomes that
suggest bias, for example fewer women than men promoted in a
particular function. At Stripe, we also check the assessment of our
remote employees against office-based employees, to make sure
there are no concerning broader trends.
The ultimate result of calibration is usually a spreadsheet or
updates to your HR tool that record any changes to performance
designations and promotion status. Once the calibration process is
complete, managers should make any needed adjustments, then
formalize the review feedback, designation, and promotion
outcomes in your company’s HR tool. Following that, there’s usually
a two-week period in which managers deliver the reviews in
performance conversations with their reports. This should occur
prior to the review being visible to the employee in the internal tool.
Calibration roles

===== Book page 412 =====
As with all company people processes, the manager’s role is to
understand the process, be prepared, and actively participate in it.
Seek to strike a balance between advocating for your team members
and being objective about their performance and impact in order to
achieve fair cross-company outcomes. Take note, for example, if you
tend to submit performance recommendations that are too harsh
(lower average designations or fewer promotion candidates) or too
lenient. Use these calibration sessions to recalibrate yourself!
With respect to running the calibration sessions, it’s critical that
a division leader assumes the role instead of someone from HR. As
the leader, you should be familiar with many of the people on your
teams, and certainly with all of the key work performed by your
teams. If you’ve prepared properly by looking at the draft data on
designations and promotion nominations, you’ll know where to
push for more information to better align your managers’
assessments.
Check your own biases. Are you only pushing for more
information on the folks you know? Are you more familiar with one
project than another and favoring those who worked on the one
you’re closer to? Above all, guard against the lowest common
denominators. If you think about performance distribution as a
normal curve—which it should be once your company has over 30
people—it’s usually fairly obvious which team members sit in the
bottom and top tails. The hardest part is figuring out the lines
between the assessments. Do you have too many people successfully
meeting expectations? Are some of them really just fine? Ask your
managers, “Would you enthusiastically rehire this person for the
role?” If not, maybe there are more folks partially meeting
expectations than you thought. On the flip side, are you truly
rewarding the top performers? Figure out where the line is between

===== Book page 413 =====
“successfully meets” and “exceeds expectations,” and between
“exceeds” and “greatly exceeds.” These are where the most vigorous
discussions should occur, and your role in all cases is to hold the
performance bar higher and seek to reward the people who truly
exceeded it.
The way to guard against a political process is to conduct good
pre-work—including reviewing data sheets, manager blurbs, and
rubrics—and to focus on your own efforts to be close to both your
direct reports and the broader teams under them, as well as their
work products. When a company has scaled, the calibration among
entry-level workers can be more of a data-driven process, but the
more senior the individuals, the more you’ll want to understand
their contributions and be the person in the room pushing back if
you feel a manager has overrepresented (or underrepresented) their
employee’s impact. Don’t ask others in the room to adjudicate when
it’s your role to hold the managers accountable.
Compensation
As I said in Chapter 3, an entire book could be written on
compensation strategies and how they change with company
strategies, talent markets, and scale. But at a minimum, you need a
core compensation philosophy and some basic elements to support
it.
A simple compensation philosophy might be: “Compensation
should be market-competitive to help attract and retain top talent,
with higher rewards for higher performance.” Put even more simply:
“Pay for performance.” Once you’ve set the philosophy, decide what
your fixed versus variable compensation elements will be. Salaries
are generally fixed, whereas a bonus program, if you have one, is
variable. Many tech companies also provide opportunities to earn

===== Book page 414 =====
additional equity in varying amounts based on performance beyond
the new hire grant.
To determine your compensation framework, you’ll need to
establish your job levels. (See Table 3 on page 179.) From there, you
can work with an outside compensation consultant or data source
(like Radford) to acquire market data that can help you set the
appropriate salary bands and equity targets for new hires at each
role and level. To start, you’ll just need enough data to set the
appropriate numbers for job offers. Ideally, you should also be able
to explain to employees when you update the market data (at least
annually) and whether you have a bonus or equity refresh program.
Compensation conversations
Of all the conversations you will have as a manager, the
compensation conversation can be the most fraught. In my
experience, people usually want to know two things about their
compensation:
Am I being treated fairly?
Am I being recognized for my performance?
Every conversation will be different, depending on what you’re
communicating and who you’re communicating it to, but there are a
few guidelines I recommend keeping in mind as you plan these
conversations:
Educate yourself
Understand the ins and outs of your compensation system. What
does the company reward? How often do reviews happen? How
does 
your 
company’s 
compensation 
compare 
to 
market
compensation? A big part of these conversations is making sure
people fully understand why your company compensates people the

===== Book page 415 =====
way it does. A certain kind of employee brings up compensation
incessantly. In those cases, it’s especially important to share how the
system works and how often compensation is reviewed. Then, when
they bring it up outside of the company’s established timeline, you
can remind them that it’s not the time to have this conversation. I
try to start every compensation conversation with a review of the
system and philosophy and an explanation of how compensation
decisions are made.
Instill trust in your systems
Ideally, your company has a well-defined compensation philosophy.
Of course, if you’re still at an early stage and are growing, your
compensation philosophy and system will evolve over time. Make
sure to set expectations with your employees. Tell them that
although your compensation structures will change and evolve,
you’re committed to keeping everyone up to date on those shifts. If
you’re concerned that your people and compensation structures are
underbuilt or undermining trust, invest in working with leadership
and your HR team, if you have one, to improve the system.
Oftentimes, the system is okay but the educational materials are
lacking, which you might be able to help remedy. In either case,
compensation and equity misunderstandings and mistakes can
permanently destroy trust, so exercise extra rigor in understanding
and contributing to compensation-related outcomes for your team.
Understand the motivators
Most of the people I’ve managed are motivated by having a positive
impact and think of financial reward primarily as an indicator of
their impact. For highly motivated employees, compensation is an
effective management tool to reinforce their motivation and
contributions. Always use compensation as a means to reinforce

===== Book page 416 =====
strong performance rather than framing rewards as an outcome
unto themselves. Where possible, point out that rewards are positive
indicators of how the company views their contributions. (For all of
the sales managers out there, your job is much easier because you
can link measurable outcomes to compensation more easily than,
say, an engineering or people operations manager can.) I’ve also
managed the rare employee who truly was motivated by financial
gain. In that case, help them contextualize the reward as an outcome
for great work, not a goal that the company will define for them.
Have the conversation
Don’t ignore the opportunity to use compensation as part of your
management tool kit. These conversations naturally follow from
formal employee processes like performance reviews. Your company
should have a schedule of when compensation changes occur and
when such conversations are warranted. If your employee is
receiving a raise or a bonus, share the compensation news in person
and use it to highlight what they’re being rewarded for and to
identify areas for improvement. You’ll have succeeded if you can
come out of that conversation having clearly communicated how the
comp adjustment tracks with the employee’s performance, and
having gained insight into how the person thinks about their
compensation. Do they feel they’re being compensated fairly? Are
they happy, or are they actively looking to leave?
In cases where the employee isn’t receiving a compensation
change, it’s still important to have the conversation, perhaps in a
regular 1:1. Remind them that there was a compensation review
process, note that in their case there was no compensation change,
and explain why. If applicable, use this as a chance to reinforce
development areas and highlight ways they can increase their impact
and contribution. Although it might feel tricky to foreground the fact

===== Book page 417 =====
that the person is not receiving a compensation change, it will build
trust that there’s a system of review in place, and in you as the
manager acknowledging the outcome. In some cases, the person
may simply not be eligible for an adjustment. But no matter what,
the conversation may yield some insight into how they view their
performance and compensation, which can support your ability to
steer future conversations. (See the chapter appendix on page 416
for 
a 
guide 
to 
preparing 
for 
and 
holding 
compensation
conversations.)
Comparisons
During compensation conversations, you might hear something
along the lines of “So-and-so is getting paid more than me even
though they’re doing the same job.” This is when being an expert in
your company’s compensation philosophy and structure comes in
handy. Anything from geographical location to tenure to when
market data was refreshed might account for discrepancies in
employee compensation; the key is to keep the conversation focused
on the employee and their performance. If they keep pushing, tell
them, “I don’t want to focus on someone else’s comp, but if you
think something is unfair, I’m happy to make sure HR looks into it.”
Then follow up with HR to make sure the system is working as
intended and reinforce that to the employee. You can’t get into
details about another employee’s compensation, but you’ve
hopefully built enough trust that your team member believes your
assessment.
Managing disappointment
Sometimes a person will be disappointed that they didn’t get a raise,
or they may feel that the raise doesn’t reflect their impact on the
organization. In my experience, this is usually either someone who

===== Book page 418 =====
has not heard your performance feedback or a high performer who
has high expectations of rewards. If the former, use this as an
opportunity to have a frank conversation about their role and
performance. Consider: Is this the right role for the employee? If
you’ve been managing well, the disappointing outcome should not
be a surprise; rather, it should reinforce the messages you’ve been
transmitting all along. If you’re managing someone out or providing
a lot of critical feedback, compensation conversations can be a
helpful tool to make the situation feel concrete. When the person
expresses disappointment, remind them that you’ve been providing
development feedback and that they haven’t had the expected level
of impact in their role. Refer back to the compensation philosophy
and explain that the system will not provide additional rewards if
the contribution hasn’t been high enough.
If the employee is performing well and has received what you
would consider a meaningful compensation increase but is still
disappointed, make sure that they understand the system and have
perspective on how they’re doing. In this case, it’s useful to
understand the average compensation increase across the function
or company. If they’re still concerned, reframe the conversation:
“How can we work together to make sure that six months from now,
you feel that your compensation and perceived impact on the
organization are more closely aligned?”
It may be that they really want to talk about getting promoted, so
focus on what that might take. If they’re truly doing well, work hard
to provide them with supporting details (for example, “You’re
receiving a larger increase than 75 percent of the company”) and dig
into how their expectations were improperly set. If they remain
disappointed, talk about how their performance and impact are the
key levers for further rewards, and probe whether they’re seeking a

