===== Book page 331 =====
This is more of a creator meeting; it’s open-ended and allows for
some more personal and social time. It doesn’t have a formal agenda
but rather gives the group an opportunity to check in on topics that
have surfaced during the week and workshop issues that one or
more members are grappling with. Right before the meeting, we
generate a list of topics in the team Slack channel. The meeting often
starts with personal check-ins and ends early if there are no topics
that can’t wait until Monday.
Offsites: two full days every quarter
This is usually a trip away together, often from Thursday afternoon
through midday or early afternoon on Saturday. These meetings
involve some pre-work and can include a bigger-picture review of
company financials and performance. When possible, we schedule
the offsite soon after a board meeting, when the board and senior
leadership have reviewed the business, which makes the meeting
more efficient. These offsites are particularly important for taking a
step back and doing more free-form brainstorming together. It’s
uninterrupted, big-picture strategic time. I’ll be honest, though—in
the early days, the team was tactically solving quite a lot, too. We
also often share feedback for one another at these offsites.
The members of the Stripe leadership team are no longer all
based in the same location, and as a result, the quarterly offsites
have taken on even more importance. In fact, once a company gets
to a certain stage, teams are rarely co-located. This makes offsites
even more critical. But offsites alone won’t enable distributed teams
to develop successfully.
Team-building complexities

===== Book page 332 =====
As with most skills, managing teams becomes more difficult as new
variables are introduced. Managing a small team of co-located
individuals is one thing, but managing distributed teams across
multiple geographies requires additional skills and greater intention.
Managing distributed and remote teams
Being distributed is in the nature of a modern company. Many high-
growth companies have ambitions to go global, and if you already
are global, you’ll have offices and employees around the world.
Larger companies have also become increasingly open to a new type
of distributed work, allowing employees to work remotely from
home. This was very much accelerated by the Covid-19 pandemic.
Stripe has had remote employees since its early years, so we
often get asked how to support distributed teams and remote work.
We haven’t cracked it yet, but we’ve accumulated many lessons that
are worth sharing about how to support distributed and remote
workers.
In my experience, managing distributed teams poses three main
challenges: coordination, cohesion, and participation.
Coordination
This is the most obvious challenge for distributed and remote teams.
People and teams have to be more diligent about what information is
documented, how decisions are made, and where discussions are
held because they’re operating in different physical locations and
often in different time zones. Because of these coordination
challenges, it’s tempting to try to assign work that remote employees
can accomplish independently, such as a small project for just one
person, but that only isolates your team more and makes them
worse at coordination.

===== Book page 333 =====
Audit your tools and practices, as well as the projects and work
assigned across your locations and remote workers, in order to:
Put in place company norms and structures that foster
asynchronous work, such as strong documentation that enables
work across time zones.
Balance the workload of distributed team members so that they
have independent, “local” work but are also connected to the rest
of the company or division. This will ensure that they don’t feel
overlooked or isolated.
Map your processes, such as code and quality or risk reviews, to
avoid team members waiting several hours for a colleague to
wake up to answer a question that helps them finish their work.
(See Table 9 on page 314 for more on the types of challenges
remote teams face and how to address them.)
SIDEBAR
—
The challenges of collaborating across time
zones
It’s all too easy to ignore the cost of collaboration across time zones. To
make it more concrete, here’s an excerpt of an example from Stripe
engineer David Doran, who is based in Dublin and is building a product
with dependencies on teams in US time zones. The problem starts when
he realizes he needs access to a lightweight directory access protocol
(LDAP) group to commit a code change in order to address an issue he’s
found.
Unfortunately, the admin-plans-readers LDAP group is owner-
approved and the owners are in the US, so I’ll wait for approval
overnight and come back to it tomorrow.

===== Book page 334 =====
The next day: My request for access to join admin-plans-
readers was approved overnight! Now I can view the merchant’s
manual fee plan so we can reproduce it in code.
It turns out that the fee plans weren’t what I needed. What I
actually need is the rate cards page, which has different owners, so I
need to start the process again. That’s more than three days of delay
on a simple change.
This has presented two learnings on changes we need to make:
1. We have to provide a self-service interface for accessing the vast
majority of systems not directly owned by the relevant team.
2. We need to develop a mechanism that preserves security and
reliability properties but also allows folks in different time zones
to get unblocked in the vast majority of cases where they need
explicit permission or approval from another team.
—
Cohesion
Give remote work equal footing within your organization. In May
2019, Stripe launched its fifth engineering hub: remote. As David
Singleton, Stripe’s CTO, noted in a blog post, launching the remote
hub allowed us to “situate product development closer to our
customers and improve our ability to tap the 99.74 percent of
talented engineers living outside the metro areas of our first four
hubs” located in San Francisco, Seattle, Dublin, and Singapore.54
This statement was a valuable acknowledgment that remote
employees are important team members. But out of sight is often,
unfortunately, out of mind. When not everyone is working in the
same place, it’s easy for teams to default to siloed, independent
pockets of work—or, worse, for the team members who happen to

===== Book page 335 =====
be co-located to dominate work decisions and capture the best
assignments.
When your team is remote or distributed, you’ll have to work
harder to get people to care about one another’s work and truly
work together so that you’re forming an actual team. The best way
to achieve this is with clear, consistent communication and team
operating practices that place everyone on a level playing field. (See
Table 9 on the next page.) It’s also about instilling strong cultural
practices, meaning you need to ingrain into everyone on the team
that the minute an informal in-person conversation turns into a
work discussion or a team decision, it needs to move to a format
that allows all relevant parties to participate, such as a Slack
channel.
Participation
There are countless ways that working from another office or
working remotely makes it hard for a person to fully participate in
company or team practices. There are the obvious challenges, like
having a harder time chiming in on a conference call or not being
able to join a meeting because it’s happening at midnight in your
time zone. The silver lining is that because these issues are fairly
obvious, teams can do a better job of accounting for them. For
instance, you can designate an active moderator for the conference
call or rotate meeting times for different time zones.
The less obvious ways people can’t participate can be more
damaging: not picking up on the dynamic in a meeting room
because you’re not there in person, for instance, or missing out on
casual meals with colleagues. These things really matter. Beyond the
obvious intentional steps to build relationships across your team,
make sure you set team and meeting norms that avoid exclusionary
practices. This includes creating a culture of documentation that

===== Book page 336 =====
encourages team members to record what happens in each meeting
so that no one has to consult a teammate in another time zone to
understand how to accomplish a task or complete a work
assignment, for example.
One thing that has really helped at Stripe is that most “hallway”
chats occur in Slack channels instead of in person. Some of our
channels are more social—we have #cats, #dogs, and #cats-and-
dogs—but most are devoted to team communication. Watch out for
Slack retention rules, though—if it needs to be permanently
documented, put it elsewhere.
Which of the three challenges you’ll need to prioritize will
depend on what kind of remote team you’re managing:
TYPE OF REMOTE
TEAM
PRIMARY CHALLENGE
A few remote
employees on a
largely
centralized team
Participation. When the majority of the team is not
remote, the hardest thing will be to make sure remote
employees feel like equal members of the team.
A whole team
that works
remotely
Cohesion. This is the quintessential remote team that
isn’t actually a team but a group of individuals with
the same manager. Invest in team building by seeing each
other in person, especially early on, if possible. Spend
time over Zoom on relationship building and work style
understanding, not just tactical items, and be very
clear about roles and accountability for every team
member.
A team split
across two or
three different
offices and some
remote
locations, or
Coordination. You see this scenario often with global
offices that need to work together. Focus on making sure
that teams are aware of decisions that impact them and
that they feel involved in those decisions.

===== Book page 337 =====
two teams that
need to work
across locations
The whole
company works
remotely
The participation challenges are less pronounced in this
scenario because you’re all in the same boat. You’re
still going to have coordination and cohesion
challenges, but in general everyone will be mutually
attuned to following best practices.
Table 9. Types of remote teams and challenges.
The mitigations for all these challenges are the same, although
some will need to be employed more firmly than others, depending
on your challenge:
Set structures and norms for inclusive meeting practices.
Provide video links for meetings and pay attention to acoustics
and sound quality. Perform active meeting facilitation and take
meeting notes.
Level the playing field. Create shared Slack channels for team
conversations to avoid the “hallway effect” and invest in
comprehensive internal documentation.
Make room for in-person time. Budget for in-person gatherings
at the right frequency, depending on team needs.
Set structures and norms for inclusive meeting practices
In-person interactions can, at least for a while, paper over a lot of a
team’s structural weaknesses. It’s not the end of the world if a
decision isn’t well-documented, as long as everyone who needed to
know the decision was in the room when it happened. But if one of
your team members is in a different time zone and the decision isn’t
recorded, you’ll create an information asymmetry and trust will

===== Book page 338 =====
erode. Make sure you’re especially crisp on ownership, the operating
cadence, and accountability mechanisms for remote teams, and
document communication norms in more detail than you think you
need to.
Level the playing field
If you’re worried about participation, the most important thing you
can do is to minimize practices that make a remote employee feel
different. Think about a team meeting for someone who is remote
versus someone who is based in the office: Someone on your team
sends a meeting invite. Multiple people in the office are joining, so
they include a room number on the invite but forget to include a
videoconferencing link. The remote employee has to reach out to the
organizer to include a link or dial-in number. Before the meeting, the
office-based team members happen to sit together at lunch, and they
start talking about an agenda item from the upcoming meeting. The
remote employee has no idea, and now they’re lacking important
context before the meeting has even started. Once it begins, the
remote employee has to go on mute because there’s construction
happening outside their home office. The office-based participants
start having a discussion. It’s hard for the remote employee to hear,
so they sit in silence while their colleagues are debating.
There are so many ways a remote employee has a different
experience from a centralized team. How much you try to level the
playing field will depend on your company philosophy. Automattic, a
completely distributed company, requires that everyone join
conference calls from a different physical location, even if some
participants happen to be in the same space. This way, no one has
the experience of being the person dialing in to the conference call
while others are co-located. They also get everyone together in
person at least once a year, and some teams gather once per quarter.

===== Book page 339 =====
At Stripe, we ensure that every remote worker has the right
hardware setup so that they can properly participate in conference
calls. We also have a strong norm that any work discussion, no
matter how minor or procedural, needs to happen via Slack or email
so that those not physically present can follow along. Making
improvements for distributed employees starts with an awareness
that differences exist, and that these can turn into detrimental
chasms between in-person and remote experiences.
Make room for in-person time
I’ve long thought it possible to build a distributed group into a
strong team without a lot of in-person time. After all, look at all the
global teams that operate effectively! But I haven’t yet found a viable
substitute for quality in-person time on a regular cadence. This is
valuable for:
Generating spontaneous social interactions and connections.
Humans are herd animals. We have a need to connect on a level
beyond the professional. You can connect on non-work topics
remotely, of course, but having unplanned social interactions and
developing deeper relationships is also important. You need to be
able to have a laugh together, talk about personal interests, and
share experiences that aren’t just video meetings.
Getting people into a different mindset, beyond day-to-day
operations. People get comfortable with day-to-day operating
rhythms pretty quickly, which is also why, if they get comfortable
for too long, operating cadences become stale. Sometimes we all
need to get out of our day-to-day setting to achieve a level of
alignment and understanding that’s hard to do in a 45- or 60-
minute meeting.

===== Book page 340 =====
For several years, I managed a group responsible for leading
revenue in all of the countries Stripe operated in. The group
consisted of the country and regional leads in North America,
Europe, and Asia. When we first formed the group, we met in person
every quarter. Usually, the leads would come to San Francisco,
where we’d have two days of working offsites and at least one team
social event. Those traveling to San Francisco would typically visit
for a full week to meet with other people and teams as well. This
time together was critical to forming both our team relationships
and our strategy for growing Stripe’s revenue.
In our first meeting together, we ended up listing everything we
had to answer, solve, or build in order to be successful, which took
up three huge whiteboards. There was a funny moment when the
group got fired up about the need to build the marketing function,
which was still in its infancy. I pointed out that we were struggling
to answer even the current inbound sales leads, and we all ended up
laughing about our poor prioritization and proverbial “good
problems to have.” Needless to say, it took a lot of time to work
through everything on those whiteboards, but we’d laid the
foundation for doing so effectively during our in-person time
together.
How often should remote teams meet in person? When you’re
first forming a remote team, plan to meet at least once a quarter, if
not more often. But once you’ve had a couple of solid in-person
interactions, you can space them out a bit more. If you plan in
person together, you can run faster and longer when you’re apart.
Later, you can move to meeting biannually, although if you’re in
growth mode and adding new members to the team, you’ll want to
continue to have quarterly in-person meetings for some time.
Situations will arise that prevent you from gathering in person—like

===== Book page 341 =====
a global pandemic—but I still think it’s a best practice to aim for,
even if you have to experiment with half-day offsites held on Zoom,
as we did at Stripe.
Going global
It wasn’t until I led my first global team at Google that I fully
internalized that being a global company isn’t about doing the same
work in different countries. I managed over 2,000 people in 16
offices around the world, and for the first year I traveled at least
once a month. It was only then that I truly absorbed the cultural
differences and strategic local needs for each business. A lot of the
challenges of operating in a different time zone and handling a work
schedule with major jet lag also felt much more real.
It’s hard to replicate the insight you get from actually traveling for
work and doing business in different countries, but I do recommend
reading Geert Hofstede’s work on the dimensions of national
cultures.55 It’s a useful guide to understanding cultural differences
and mapping your own company against the countries in which it
operates. Interestingly, I’ve never found major differences in user
needs—a marketer buying Google Ads in Indonesia wants the same
thing as a marketer in Canada—but there are important differences
in how you conduct aspects of your business, as Hofstede explains.
There are also ecosystem variants, like whether there’s a large
developer community, and there are landscape factors, such as local
competitors or different consumer expectations.
Make sure your team understands your company’s cultural
expectations and how they differ from local norms. This often
comes up for sales teams with respect to the kinds of relationship-
building activities clients expect. Aside from developing your own
understanding, I think it’s a useful team exercise to review the
cultural dimensions of your business and discuss the implications

===== Book page 342 =====
for your day-to-day work, plus any guidance local teams might need
to help balance their local cultural reality with the company’s. My
first trips to Japan and China for Google were full of lessons,
predominantly in how much information was shared and business
conducted late at night over drinks. Think about how you will help
your teams understand prevailing behaviors without feeling like they
must follow all of them when conducting business. (I don’t think
drinking alcohol is a sales skill requirement, for instance.)
Interestingly, when I did a cultural comparison exercise with a
group of Stripe’s country leads, we all realized that Stripe is not a
simple mirror of American culture. That makes sense: Its founders
are from Ireland. In fact, Stripe is an interesting hybrid of a few
cultural dimensions. Once we realized this, we understood that it
was an opportunity to build a shared global identity. It was also a
chance to translate that identity into local expectations, even if
they’re not the norm in every culture. For example, in some cultures
it’s more common for outside-of-work socializing to double as a
forum for doing business. At Stripe, we make sure that people are
aware of this, but we also emphasize that the choice about how
much to participate is theirs.
Adding remote workers
If you work at a company with global ambitions, or one that’s still
accommodating the shifts brought about by the pandemic, educate
yourself about remote work best practices with resources from all-
remote companies like Automattic56 or GitLab.57 Here are a few key
elements to keep in mind as you add remote workers to your team:
Maturity of operating system
Remember Operating Principle 4: Come back to your operating
system. If you feel fairly confident that you have a strong operating

===== Book page 343 =====
system and cadence, as well as established norms and good sources
of asynchronous information (video recordings of meetings,
excellent note-taking practices, etc.), or if you’re willing to invest in
strengthening them, you’re better positioned to add remote team
members.
Role
Is this a job that requires a lot of coordination? Engineering,
product, and design roles typically require more collaboration to get
work done, while some roles, like legal and finance, can be done
more independently. Carefully structure remote or hybrid team units
so that the team can effectively manage the level of coordination
needed. For example, three remote product, design, and engineering
employees on a team may actually find it easier to coordinate than a
team where two of those three people are co-located.
Manager support
Remote management is its own skill set. Between 2014 and 2016,
Stripe had a requirement that remote employees be managed by
remote managers. We felt that a remote manager would have more
empathy for the remote experience and would find it easier to build
the right coordination, participation, and cohesion mechanisms. We
now provide more manager support and training, so non-remote
managers do manage remote employees and teams, but the intention
is still valuable. It takes time to build the skills to connect with a
team you don’t see in person, and it takes a good amount of empathy
for the remote experience to design and operate the most conducive
team system for those people.
Aside from empathy for the experiences of people not in the
same room, managers of remote teams must develop management
practices and mitigation strategies for the issues that tend to crop up

===== Book page 344 =====
with remote work. For example, managers can create and facilitate a
team Slack channel and insist that meaningful side conversations be
documented and sent to a team email list. Managers should also
make themselves available to answer quick questions via non-in-
person channels. In addition, they should be structured and
consistent in how they connect with the team through 1:1s and other
information-sharing tactics, like the snippets docs I mentioned in
my discussion of Stripe’s leadership meetings.
Experience level
At Stripe, we’ve found that it’s easier to support remote employees
who have already had experience working remotely. As we’ve all
learned, it takes some adjustment to work well remotely, and it can
be particularly hard on new graduates who are just developing their
work skills and learning their jobs. Consider the kinds of
programming you can offer to bolster the remote work learning
curve, especially for those with less overall experience.
A consistent theme of this book is to be very intentional with
your foundations. This is especially true when you’re managing a
distributed company and adding remote team members. What
works when everyone is together in one office will not scale when
distance and time zones divide you. Consider the documentation,
norms, and practices you’ll need to enable folks to get their work
done and to stay connected to their team and to the company, and
build those in from day one. As a manager, seek to understand the
different national cultures represented on your team and the
particularities of the distributed and remote work experiences.
Travel, try being remote yourself for a week, and adjust your team
management practices accordingly. Above all, seek out feedback,
including through your company engagement survey, on how

===== Book page 345 =====
productive, effective, and connected remote employees feel, and be
ready to improve in response to their feedback.
Underperforming teams
Sometimes you’ve done everything you can to build a strong team—
remote or in-person—but it’s still faltering. If your teams are
reviewing their goals and metrics at the right cadence, you should be
able to catch that something is off track before the issue becomes
too unwieldy, and you’ll hopefully be able to solve the root problem.
But sometimes teams don’t hit their metrics or milestones for weeks
running. It feels like there’s always a reasonable explanation, yet you
have a nagging sense that those explanations are masking a deeper
issue.
How do you course-correct? Start by taking the following steps:
Investigate the root cause by asking some probing questions
You probably have a theory about what’s causing the poor execution.
Test your hypothesis in 1:1s with the relevant team members and see
what comes to light. For example, you might observe, “There seems
to be a lot of dependencies on data architecture work.” If your team
members confirm that that’s the case, dig into why there seem to be
so many dependencies, or whether the team is missing capabilities
or resources that would prevent the bottleneck. You’re not asking
about a specific person but rather a set of work that seems
perpetually behind schedule or off track.
Have an open conversation about the issue in your team meeting
Approach it from a place of curiosity, and avoid accusations. Ask the
team the following questions:

===== Book page 346 =====
Why do you think we’re behind on our goal? Be open to the
possibility that it’s the wrong goal, but don’t be lenient.
Do these reasons feel in or out of our control? Usually, the
reasons are more in the team’s control than they think, so push
on this.
What can we do now to get back on track? Document ideas
and make sure it’s clear who is accountable for the work to follow
up and change course.
When it comes to the reasons that really are out of our
control, how much impact will they have on our ability to
make progress? What could we do to control those external
factors? Your team may not have considered all the angles, for
example stepping in to help another team get critical work done.
If the issue is that you have the wrong goal, the next steps are
fairly straightforward:
Agree with the team that you need to adjust your goals as a result
of new information.
Make sure to clearly document the original goal, how the goal
changed, and why, both with your team and with stakeholders.
This is critical to maintaining credibility.
Be transparent internally about the fact that you’re resetting your
goals and why you’re doing it. Be particularly clear about what
you learned and what you’ll do differently in the future.
If the issue is your team’s skill set or a collaboration issue across
team members, continue to develop your hypothesis on the root
cause, and seek data to build confidence that you’ve identified the
true source of the problem. If it’s an issue with an individual on the
team, consult the sections on feedback in Chapter 5 for guidance. If
it’s a collaboration issue between two or more people, take time to

===== Book page 347 =====
meet with the individuals involved, first separately and then
together. Facilitate a conversation in which each person can share
nonjudgmental feedback on work style and process, and make it
clear that you all need to work together to find an effective path
forward. Take pains to be neutral and emphasize that the individuals
need to change the dynamic for the good of the team. If you don’t
see a positive change, consider shifting one or both people to
another team. In addition, consider whether one of the individuals
involved may in fact have a performance issue in the form of poor
collaboration skills—in which case, see Chapter 5 for more on
feedback and performance management.
On occasion, you might think that the issue is limited to a few
individuals but discover that there are actually many group
dynamics contributing to what has become a fractious team
environment. Don’t ignore this trend. Confront it—urgently.
Conduct or ask a neutral party like HR to conduct a series of
interviews with team members—like a 360° review process but for a
team—and have them write up a summary. Then have a critical
session to discuss the team dynamics and what you will all do to
address the negative trends and tendencies. Seek explicit
commitments on what people will improve. Most points of friction
come from a lack of mutual self-awareness—see Operating Principle
1—so return to your personality and work style assessments and
spend time getting to know one another and your value systems.
Give the team a vocabulary to use when working together, and make
it clear that the team’s dynamics matter to you and to the company’s
success.
In my experience, missing a goal is often due to a dependency, or
many dependencies, on other teams. This is especially true as your
team scope and your company grow. Perhaps your team controls

===== Book page 348 =====
one aspect of a project, but you need another team to deliver their
half. Work would be much easier if everything were in your control,
but that’s not the reality—of work or of life. Instead, your role as a
manager is to anticipate dependencies, negotiate with other teams,
and work through issues when they occur, escalating to your
respective leaders if needed. I often think of my work as a manager
as clearing the path my team will need to travel. Anything that slows
them down is on me.58
Working with other teams
Because some of the hardest accountability problems for a manager
to navigate crop up when your team can’t get their work done
because they’re dependent on the work of one or more other teams,
it’s important to de-risk those dependencies. Here’s a quick guide to
doing that:
Identify dependencies during your planning process. For
every goal, determine what work you need done by when from
other teams. Discuss this work with the other teams before they
finalize their own plans. Ninety percent of the time, teams are on
the same page about what needs to be done. For the 10 percent of
cases where teams disagree about the work, escalate to the
common decision-maker for both teams. The outcome will either
be that the team you’re dependent on will complete the work, or
that your goal will be judged not to be a company priority and
you will adjust your own plans accordingly.
Set up a semi-regular check-in to keep your team and
partner teams up to date on progress. Check-ins can be in the
form of an email, followed by a meeting if the project is getting
off track.

===== Book page 349 =====
Embed someone on the team. Sometimes it’s useful to have a
representative from the team you’re dependent on join your team
meetings, and for you to send a representative to their meetings.
Form a working group. In some cases, it may make sense to
form a temporary working group that comprises members from
the different teams. (See Table 6 on page 265 for more on the
differences between working groups and teams.) You’re
essentially forming a mini-team that has its own shared goals and
metrics for the duration of the project. Make sure the working
group has a DRI who is tracking progress and holding the group
accountable.
If, despite all your de-risking efforts, you still find yourself at an
impasse with another team, I suggest you constructively escalate. A
few retrospectives I’ve conducted on my biggest errors as a manager
and leader uncovered my own weak spots in this area. Because I
tend to be independent in how I accomplish work, relying more on
my own teams than on peers, and because I’m innately collaborative
and empathetic, I have more than once neglected to expose a critical
dependency that was failing until it was too late.
Asking for help is not a failure. In fact, escalation paths are one of
the reasons management structures exist. You don’t want to be the
person who has a hair-trigger escalation tendency, which will make
you seem ineffective, not to mention wildly unpopular with
colleagues. But you also don’t want to be the one who gets your
team stuck because you didn’t escalate to unblock their progress.
(For more on resolving dependencies, I’ve included a description of
Stripe’s unblocking process in the chapter appendix on page 343.)
Finally, in a nod to Operating Principle 3—distinguish between
management and leadership—it’s useful to take a look back and
assess whether you had the right strategy. Often, adopting a more

===== Book page 350 =====
proactive vision will allow you to not only identify dependencies but
also architect a future state that doesn’t require such dependencies
in the first place. This might involve a different technical
architecture, a new strategy that includes a new organizational
structure, or even a fresh set of priorities that negate the current
path.
Managing through uncertainty
When something isn’t working, everyone feels it. In these situations,
I lean on a quote from author Rebecca Solnit: “Authentic hope
requires clarity… and imagination.”59 Getting back on track is going
to take a combination of management (clarity) and leadership
(inspiration and imagination) to help the team make it through times
of uncertainty or challenge.
Here’s how I think about supporting teams through uncertain
times:
Be transparent, to a point
When a team is experiencing uncertainty, it’s rare that a manager
isn’t feeling it too. Some managers make the mistake of exposing too
much of their own worry, which can be destabilizing for their teams.
But the more common mistake I see managers making is not
acknowledging the challenges head-on with their teams or
pretending they’ve got a plan all figured out. This only serves to
erode trust just when the team needs their manager most.
I try to be open and honest with my teams during times of
uncertainty. This doesn’t mean you must index toward negativity
and pessimism—in fact, I would advise the opposite. But it’s critical
that you demonstrate that you have a good pulse on the team’s state
and that you’re aware that a change is necessary, even if you don’t
know exactly what that change will look like yet. Try to be as

===== Book page 351 =====
objective as possible. This can be as simple as saying “I don’t think
we have the right people at the table to accomplish what we need to
get done,” or “I’m aware that the deadlines are unrealistic.” You can
also be transparent and say, “We don’t have the details of a plan in
place, and it may take us a while to get there, but I’m working on it.”
What’s most important is that you acknowledge the situation and
show empathy and a drive to improve what’s not working.
Reiterate the vision
Don’t forget to engage the imagination. You’ve placed your team on a
path, and it includes a narrative about the brighter future that your
work is enabling. Just because times are uncertain doesn’t mean the
vision is wrong or that you’ve lost your way. Retell the story of why
you’re doing the work you do and how the future will be better for it.
Move forward
Despite all of your instincts to the contrary, I recommend biasing
toward action during times of uncertainty. There is a great
temptation, especially when things aren’t going well, to try to come
up with a perfect plan or to overanalyze the situation. But trust me,
you don’t want to make a bigger mess! Oftentimes, the best thing
you and your team can do is start moving. This may mean making
small decisions and taking small- to medium-sized actions, but any
action at all can be very meaningful. Communicate openly about
these steps and what you’re learning along the way.
Stripe’s handling of the Covid-19 pandemic is a good example. As
Covid infections moved beyond China, we began to discuss the
implications for Stripe. Our CEO was tracking the virus closely and
was most concerned about an outbreak that might impact critical
teams, including our leadership team and the engineering teams
responsible for Stripe’s security and reliability. Although we didn’t

===== Book page 352 =====
have a lot of data and had no detailed plan on how we’d proceed, we
decided to start taking action to mitigate risk.
In February 2020, we shared that half of the leadership team and
a few critical teams would immediately start working remotely. The
danger of sharing this step was that we might imply a hierarchy of
who or what was most valued at the company. But the danger in not
sharing this information was that we might put the company at risk:
We were still small enough that having many people get sick at once
would be untenable for the business. It would also imply
uncertainty, and would potentially lead employees to assume that
we were not analyzing the situation—or worse, that we were not
acting 
on 
what 
we 
knew. 
From 
there, 
we 
methodically
communicated each decision and kept the entire company informed
with emails and a resource page updated daily. Our guiding
principles were to be there for our users and to prioritize the health
and safety of our employees. Everyone understood our decisions
and actions in the context of those objectives.
SIDEBAR
—
Reid Hoffman on managing through crisis
Although it’s relevant to talk about the crisis of the pandemic, it’s also
useful to consider more “expected” crises (strange as it is to say). In an
interview, Reid Hoffman, the cofounder and former chairman of
LinkedIn, offered a great case study on how he steered the company
through a major competitive threat. You can find a transcript of our
conversation 
about 
leadership 
and 
management 
at
press.stripe.com/scaling-people/interviews.
In May 2007, Facebook launched the Facebook Platform. The
Facebook Platform gave third-party developers the ability to build

===== Book page 353 =====
applications using Facebook data. Until then, Facebook’s focus was
social and LinkedIn’s was professional, but a platform that gave
developers access to Facebook data had the potential to creep into
LinkedIn territory. A number of people came to me and declared
LinkedIn dead.
I wasn’t so sure, but I acknowledged the possibility. “Okay,” I
said, “what if we were to build something on top of the Facebook
Platform to test how existential the threat is to our business?” We
assembled a team that would take eight weeks to build a minimum
viable product, the lowest-effort product to see if there really was a
competitive threat from the Facebook Platform. The team’s
objectives were to:
Determine whether we could build something that was disruptive
to LinkedIn on the Facebook Platform. If we found that we could,
we’d accelerate development of the product so we could get there
before others did.
Understand how the Facebook Platform actually works, and
whether we could learn anything useful for when LinkedIn built
its own developer platform.
We assigned three different teams to sprint toward the finish line,
meeting every day to discuss progress. By the end of eight weeks,
we’d launched three different apps. None of them attracted more
than 50 daily active users. We could have picked up a phone book
and called people to get more usage than that!
Of course, the next question from the team was whether we were
just incompetent. Perhaps we had become so inured to LinkedIn
that we didn’t understand how to build a successful app on the
Facebook Platform. To test our own skills with the Facebook
Platform, we pared the three teams down to one, which I ran. Our

===== Book page 354 =====
team launched an app called Bumper Stickers. Bumper Stickers
allowed you to upload a sticker to your profile and slap it on other
Facebook friends’ profiles as well. We were the third most active app
on the platform for six months straight. Bumper Stickers was not
related to LinkedIn at all, and that was the point. We were pretty
confident that we knew how to use the Facebook Platform, LinkedIn
aside, and that there wasn’t a credible threat to LinkedIn’s business.
In hindsight, the launch of the Facebook Platform wasn’t much of
a crisis at all. But to get to that confidence, we needed to
acknowledge that we didn’t have all the answers, and we needed to
have a plan to start getting them.
—
Diversity and inclusion
Managers play an important role in facilitating diversity, equity,
inclusion, and belonging on their teams. There are many resources
available on this topic, and I’m not an expert, so I’ll add just a few
thoughts from the perspective of a manager and a person who seeks
to constantly improve as an ally, and as a woman in leadership
whom others view as an example.
First, a great team and company are not only built by hiring well
but also by building an environment that fosters and retains talent. I
believe the work you do on diversity and inclusion is, fundamentally,
work that creates a better environment for everyone. There’s a good
deal of compelling research on how diversity positively impacts
team performance.60 As a manager, you’re responsible for the output
of your team, and building a strong and diverse team that is also
high-functioning is one of the most effective ways to accomplish
your goals. Homogeneous teams may execute more quickly, but they
don’t generally push the thinking. Diverse teams get the most

===== Book page 355 =====
outsize results, although it takes time and investment to build what
Harvard Business School professor and researcher Amy Edmondson
calls the psychological safety to outperform.61 Intuitively, this makes
sense: The problem space that many companies are tackling is too
big to hold in one set of experiences and perspectives. If you can add
people with different backgrounds and opinions, and if you can
draw out those perspectives on your teams, you’re going to be able
to take on problems more multidimensionally—but only if every
person feels valued and comfortable fully participating.
I’m chiefly talking about racial and gender diversity here, but a
diverse 
team 
also 
has 
less 
visually 
noticeable 
qualities.
Socioeconomic background, education, sexual orientation, gender
identity, political and religious beliefs, and where and in what
circumstances a person was raised are all elements of a diverse
team. When a company is growing, it’s amazing how quickly team
members can start cloning themselves—everyone thinks in a similar
way, went to similar high schools and universities, likes the same
types of extracurriculars. Why? Because they referred one another
to the company. To a certain extent, this is great, since you do want
great referrals. But you must watch this cycle and break it early if
that’s the only way you’re hiring and scaling.
One of the ways I come to understand whether my team contains
less visible elements of diversity is in the work we do to get to know
each other, our backgrounds, and our work styles. Whether it’s the
career conversion I outlined earlier in this chapter or a facilitated
team-building session at an offsite, I seek to create an environment
where people feel comfortable sharing more about themselves. It’s
not something you should ever force, but it’s important to ask
yourself how well you know your team. As a manager, you should
constantly seek to bring different perspectives and thinking into

===== Book page 356 =====
your division, facilitate open communication, and celebrate the
perspectives and insights every team member offers to benefit your
users—who, I’m betting, are diverse themselves—and, by proxy,
your business.
Managers can exercise influence on diversity and inclusion in
three areas in particular—paying attention in each to ensuring that
opportunities are broadcast widely both internally and externally:
Hiring
Performance assessment, reward, and recognition
Running teams
Here I’ll share some brief thoughts on the role managers can play
to increase diversity in each of these areas. Before you begin, I
recommend educating yourself about the experiences of people who
would be considered members of historically underrepresented
groups in your country and your company. As someone operating in
the US, for example, I’ve found it useful to read the Coqual
publication “Being Black in Corporate America.”62
Hiring
Assess your team portfolio. What are the backgrounds and
viewpoints you’re lacking? If you don’t know what you don’t know,
ask other managers if you can join their team meetings to observe.
Notice how the team dynamics might differ and what your team
might be missing.
Build a hiring pipeline that exposes you to a lot of different
candidates, and don’t start interviewing until you have a strong,
diverse pipeline. Add someone to your interviewing team who has a
very different background from yours and different strengths. They
may be able to recognize strengths and assess candidates that you
may not find as easy to understand. Find the interviewer who

===== Book page 357 =====
complements your intuition about a candidate’s strengths and
challenges your assumptions.
All too often, companies rely on hiring as a panacea for fostering
diversity at all levels of the organization. But many neglect the
critical work of developing and retaining a diverse leadership team.
The consulting group BCG analyzed its own industry’s lack of
success in this area, and its learnings are applicable beyond
management consulting. The group found that among early-career
consultants, all with similar GMAT scores and GPAs, those from
underrepresented groups within the company failed to advance at a
similar rate for two primary reasons: a weak sense of belonging and
difficulty navigating professional environments.63 With that in mind,
the manager’s role becomes even more important once they’ve built
a more diverse team. The key is to run the team equitably and
inclusively. After all, you can invest all you want in composing a
more diverse team, but without equitable processes and an inclusive
environment, the team will not be successful. It’s also unlikely you
will attract more diverse candidates to your company in the future.
Performance assessment, reward, and recognition
Some of the biggest mistakes I’ve seen with regard to having a fair
system are tactical mistakes made by managers: picking someone
for a project via a short process without explicit selection criteria,
deciding on promotions without objective data, or adding someone
to the team just because they used to work together. All of these
actions have ramifications. Check yourself and run a lightweight,
thoughtful process in which you clearly lay out the opportunities
and incorporate performance measures into the decision-making.
In fast-moving environments, many people fill open roles or
assign projects by tapping someone on the shoulder. The tendency is
to fill the role with someone you know who has a skill set similar to

===== Book page 358 =====
yours. This is certainly an efficient way to hire, but it might not be
the smartest—it leaves out a broad swath of people who might have
raised their hands, or even those who might not have spoken up but
who could have been great if you’d just looked at their performance
on similar work. Create a system that makes new opportunities
clear, and give people an opportunity to volunteer for a project or
role on your team. If people you think should volunteer don’t, talk to
them to find out why, encourage them to seek out new
opportunities, and help them do so.
The main goal here is to make sure all your processes feel
equitable. Establish a common, agreed-upon way of evaluating the
best person to promote, give a project to, or nominate for a
leadership development opportunity. Have clear criteria for
assessing potential candidates—see Chapter 3—and build equity
checks into your people processes, like calibration for performance
management and pay parity analysis for compensation. These don’t
need to be exhaustive audits or heavy processes: Look for
straightforward but effective methods, like the medical checklists
that the best hospitals use to make sure there are no errors in
treatment.
Running teams
Like your company processes, the way you run your team should
give people equal chances to prove themselves. Start with your team
onboarding process and solicit feedback to make sure that all new
team members, no matter their background, feel prepared to
contribute after their first month in the role. Beyond the initial few
weeks, almost any team interaction is an opportunity to be inclusive:
how you collect agenda items, plan an offsite, run a meeting, or
make a decision on a controversial subject. Pay attention to airtime.
If someone hasn’t said anything in a team meeting, give them an

===== Book page 359 =====
opportunity to share their opinion. Assume that how you manage
can probably be more inclusive than it is. Ask someone you trust to
observe you and suggest how you might make your day-to-day
management practices more inclusive. Better yet, read the book
Unleashed by Frances Frei and Anne Morriss.64 It’s one of the few
books I’ve read that provides tangible frameworks and practices to
build inclusion into your teams and your company.
Author David Foster Wallace’s 2005 commencement speech at
Kenyon College is one of the most impactful things I’ve read about
empathy and compassion.65 In it, he says, “The really important kind
of freedom involves attention and awareness and discipline, and
being able truly to care about other people and to sacrifice for them
over and over in myriad petty, unsexy ways every day.” It’s an
exhortation to resist our default beliefs and assumptions, to fight for
awareness of the realities that are often hidden to us, and to be
present and conscious. That is what inclusion requires.
Finally, although I am a believer in building diverse teams,
understanding one another’s differences, and being sensitive to the
fact that we can never truly know someone else’s experiences—
particularly those of a person from a historically underrepresented
group if you’re not a member of that group—I am also a believer in
teams uniting around their shared qualities and dreams. Leaders
should bring in diverse team members and celebrate and understand
their perspectives while also uniting the group around a common
vision, with common appreciation for what is true about all of us:
our shared human experience and our desire for love and respect. At
the risk of sounding too optimistic, I think there’s real value in
creating a collective vision in a world that encourages polarization
and difference. Focus on cultivating that vision.

===== Book page 360 =====
These same principles are evident in the work of Chloé Valdary,
an American writer and entrepreneur who provides social,
emotional, and diversity and inclusion education.66 Valdary
developed what she calls the theory of enchantment, which has the
following core tenets:
Treat people like human beings, not political abstractions.
Criticize to uplift and empower, never to tear down, never to
destroy.
Root everything you do in love and compassion.
These are meaningful tenets for managers as well. Adopt these
principles and create a shared vision to which all of your team
members belong. Set goals, measure progress, and hold yourself and
other leaders accountable not just for the diverse composition of
teams but also for the team environment each manager creates. This
is not for the sake of some checklist—it will make for a tighter-knit
company fabric, a stronger team, and better results.
Team communication
When I think about leadership and management, I hear the voice of
Sigal Barsade, the business school professor I mentioned earlier in
this chapter. When she lectured on change management, she
emphasized, “Communicate, communicate, and by the way,
communicate.”
Much of my advice for teams ultimately boils down to
communication: Set expectations well, share the same information
with everyone, and create an environment that facilitates an open
exchange of ideas. So much of the work of a manager comes back to
communication, whether 1:1 or with the team, division, or company.

===== Book page 361 =====
It’s worth understanding your company’s approach to internal
communication so that you can layer it into your own.
As discussed in Chapter 2, internal communication is a
mechanism for building trust. You reinforce this trust by sharing
team meeting notes and decisions and by continuing to
communicate even amid uncertainty. As you think about your team,
especially if it’s growing, consider mapping the formal and informal
means by which team members acquire information. The more you
scale, the more you need to formalize information-sharing. This is
true for companies and for teams. Otherwise, there’s a risk that
people will acquire knowledge at different times, which can lead to a
perception of politics and relationships being the only way to get
anything done.
As a leader or manager, you’re privy to much more information
than the average employee at the company. If you neglect to key
your reports into relevant information, your employees are going to
be missing important context that they need to do their jobs well. I
recommend including a “pass-downs” agenda item in your team
meeting to share information from company leadership that’s
relevant for your team members to know, either for context or
because it directly impacts their work. (Usually, you’ll receive this
from your own manager.) These pass-downs might include new
information, or you might provide additional framing to company
messages that have been delivered by leaders via email or at the
company all-hands meeting.
Of course, you’ll need to continually exercise judgment about
what to share and deeply consider how to frame the information.
When I sat in staff meetings with Sheryl Sandberg at Google, she
would often share a piece of information and then say, “I think the
right way to think about this is. . .” and help contextualize the

===== Book page 362 =====
decision or action that company leaders had taken. Your team will
be grateful for your perspective, especially on items that might affect
them, and for the chance to discuss and ask questions about
important company decisions or news.
Another practice to consider is having a team snippets document
that every team member completes each week. This way, you don’t
have to take up meeting time with updates, but everyone has
information about what the rest of the team is up to and the status
of important work. If you lead a larger team or division, consider a
weekly or monthly cadence of updates that you share with everyone
on the team. Use this time to reinforce goals and priorities, celebrate
wins, discuss challenges, and ask for ideas. Above all, use it to keep
the team connected to you as their leader. Don’t be afraid to share
personal anecdotes or photos.
Lastly, try to end every day thinking about what you need to tell
other people. For my first six years at Stripe, I lived in Menlo Park
and worked in the San Francisco office. The commute home,
anywhere from 45–60 minutes, was a perfect time to reflect on
everything I’d learned that day, consider what information the
people in my division needed to have, and, when I wasn’t driving, to
share it out, usually via chat or email, to individuals or teams. Find
the communication methods that work best for you and apply them
consistently.

===== Book page 363 =====
EXERCISES AND TEMPLATES
—
Chapter 4
Career Conversations
Planning and Running Your Offsite
Leadership Team Snippets and Updates
Stripe’s Unblocking Process
To access printer-friendly versions of these worksheets, go to
http://press.stripe.com/scaling-people/workbooks.

===== Book page 364 =====
Career Conversations
Duration
60 minutes (30–45 minutes if the person just graduated from school)
Approach
Pre-conversation
1. If you’re working with a new team, take a moment in one of your first team
meetings to let team members know that you’re planning on having a career
conversation with each of them over the next few weeks, and share the
context and goals of the conversation. If you’re working with just one new
person, you can mention the career chat in an email or an early 1:1.
Script:
Over the next few weeks, I’m going to schedule a one-off, 60-minute 1:1
with each of you to better understand your past career moves and start
working with you on your future development goals. I call these chats
career conversations, but they’re really get-to-know-you conversations.
There’s no pre-work required other than being ready to talk through a
bit of your life and career history. If you like, you can bring a résumé to
refer to, but it’s not required. These are some of my favorite
conversations, and they help me understand your career narrative. I’m
looking forward to them!
2. Send a reminder outlining the goals for the conversation the day before you
meet. There’s no need to do it earlier—otherwise, people might feel like they
have to prepare more than they should.
Script:
Thanks for taking the time to walk me through a bit of your life history
and career in our session tomorrow. Mostly, I want to get to know you
better. In particular, I’d like to learn more about the choices you’ve made
so far and what motivated you to make them. If you like, we can talk a
bit about where you grew up, your family, and why you chose to attend
the school you did. We’ll focus most of the time on the learning and

===== Book page 365 =====
career steps you’ve taken and why. If it’s useful, feel free to share or
bring a copy of your résumé.
Toward the end of the conversation, I’d love to project out five years and
have you consider where you think you’ll find yourself in your career.
Not a title or specific role, but where you see yourself generally and
what your day-to-day might look like. All of this is laying the groundwork
for us to make sure that we keep the bigger picture in mind when we
talk about your development. When you’re facing a choice about a
project or even a new role, it will likely be useful for us to reflect on your
career arc and make sure whatever you choose fits with the path you’ve
outlined. Don’t worry—no one is holding anyone to any five-year career
plans, but it will be a helpful reference point as we continue to work
together.
Conversation
You’ll want to avoid over-scripting this conversation, so I’ll just share some
guidelines and sample questions here.
The conversation takes a “walk me through your history” approach. The most
important thing to do is actively listen, take notes that you can refer to in future
conversations, and ask “why” a lot. You’re trying to understand what motivates
the person and why they made the choices they did, and to help them reflect on
those choices. What do they think about those decisions now? How did those
decisions influence their thinking? What have they not explored? What do they
want to return to?
Tell me about where you grew up.
Some people launch into a fair amount of detail about their childhood,
parents, parents’ occupations, and schooling. Others will share one step at
a time. I don’t pry on family topics, but I also remain open and listen closely
if people do want to share. I’m a firm believer that family life and family
patterns manifest in our work selves and that it’s good to be aware of them.
If people are reluctant to share, I try to emphasize that I’m looking to lay out
some facts on location, schooling, and early interests. I find most people
don’t mind sharing more.
Tell me about where you went to school.

===== Book page 366 =====
I get the person talking about what interested them in school, why they
chose their college, if applicable, and why they chose their course of study.
What did you do right after college? Why did you make
that decision?
These questions help you understand why your report made the choices
they did after graduating. Did they know what they wanted? If not, what
were their inklings? Why did they end up choosing what they did? Where
did they think they would end up? Have they ended up there? Why or why
not? Post-school decisions give you insight into a person’s early
motivations, which they often hold on to later in life.
Tell me about your favorite job. Tell me about your
least favorite job. How and why did you make the
decisions you made when choosing what roles you
wanted to pursue?
Focus on the roles your report has had and the choices they made within
companies. I try to get a sense of their path and their choices, especially
the why. I also try to get a sense of the learnings they took away from their
previous roles, especially about what work they’re good at and enjoy doing
and what work they find harder and why. Work your way up to the present
and dive in if there’s an interesting or telling nugget. Really dig into their
motivations in this section and see if you can both surface some patterns.
What sort of work do you see yourself doing in the
future? Who are the people you’ll be working with?
Where will you be living?
This is the forward-looking part of the conversation, and it’s much more
exploratory than the first four sections. Probe on any thoughts the person
has about their future, no matter how abstract.
Focus more on what their future work or role looks like and less on a
particular title or position. You’re trying to figure out what type of work they
want to be doing (management, research, execution, leadership,
communication, analytics, advanced problem-solving, consulting, etc.) and
dig into what they want to get exposure to in order to get there. Eventually,
this conversation can support a discussion about career development

===== Book page 367 =====
□
□
□
□
□
□
□
plans, but the point is to align on opportunities you should both look out for
to help the person start developing those skills or opportunities. Use some
of the themes from the last four sections—how they make decisions, what
was important to them—to guide the discussion here.
This section ends up being useful to reference in 1:1s because people often
face choices that could benefit from a refresher on their longer-term goals.
(For example: Which project should I pick? What parts of my role should I
try to delegate?)
Wrap-up
Recap the conversation, share any notes you took, and write down two or three
development goals to keep an eye on together.
Planning and Running Your
Offsite
Planning checklist
Date of offsite:
1+ month before offsite
Set goals and objectives.
Schedule date, time, and length.
Start brainstorming the agenda with your team.
Book space.
1 month before
Order food and beverages.
Finalize the agenda and assign each section to a DRI.
Share rough pre-work templates with DRIs.

===== Book page 368 =====
□
□
□
□
□
□
□
□
□
□
□
□
□
□
□
1 week before
Finalize materials.
Run through the agenda and content with DRIs.
Send the agenda, pre-reads, and any pre-work to the team.
Check that all meals are scheduled and confirm your headcount.
Confirm venue setup and any materials needed with the offsite space.
Determine how to enter the space (e.g., do you need an entrance.code, or
does someone need to let you in?).
Duplicate the session template for each planned session.
Duplicate the icebreaker template for each planned icebreaker.
1 day before
Send a welcome email to the team; include the venue location, how to get
there, and how to enter the space, and remind the team about pre-reads
and pre-work.
Confirm details with vendors.
Collect supplies you’ll need from the office (e.g., pens, markers, sticky notes,
flip charts, chargers, AV equipment).
Day of offsite
Have your team check-in, then follow the agenda for the rest of the day.
After offsite
Send notes and action items to assigned DRIs.
Send a feedback form to all participants and ask them to rate the offsite.
Track all action items until complete.
Day-of-offsite templates

===== Book page 369 =====
Offsite structure
1. Offsite welcome
2. Check-in exercise
3. Icebreaker
4. Session
5. Check-out exercise
Offsite welcome email
Welcome to the [offsite name]!
To get started, I’ll share a bit more context about why we’ve
gotten this group together and how we’ll be using the time. And
don’t worry—we’ve got plenty of scheduled breaks and social time.
Purpose
We’re here because [explain the purpose of the offsite].
Logistics
[Ahead of the offsite, share documentation and directions and tell
participants what they should bring. On the day of the offsite,
share information like the Wi-Fi access code, directions to the
restroom, where you’ll be eating lunch, etc.]
Agenda
Session
What we’ll be doing
Time
Length
Facilitator
Check-in
Share expectations for the
day
9:30
a.m.
30
minutes
Cheryl
Davis
Session 1
Work style assessment
discussion
10
a.m.
1 hour
Bethel
Musa
Break
Take a stretch
11
15

===== Book page 370 =====
a.m.
minutes
Session 2
Last year results
retrospective
11:15
a.m.
1 hour
Lola Aisca
Lunch
Eat!
12:15
p.m.
1 hour
Post-
lunch
exercise
Big-picture brainstorm
1:15
p.m.
30
minutes
Alan
Chowansky
Session 3
Decide on strategic pillars
for this year (note: pre-
reads required)
1:45
p.m.
1 hour
Maria
Marquis
Break
Check some emails
2:45
p.m.
15
minutes
Session 4
Finalize goals for the
quarter and DRIs
3
p.m.
1 hour
Fang Li
Wrap-up
and
check-out
How did we do?
4
p.m.
1 hour
Cheryl
Davis
Social
Social time and team-
building cooking lesson
5
p.m.
Felix Marlin
Leadership Team Snippets
and Updates
Please update by 10 p.m. on the Sunday night before the meeting.
Date:

===== Book page 371 =====
Actions status: Link to action-tracking spreadsheet
Actions
Name, action, due date
Discussion topics
Actions (5 mins)
User guest (10 mins)
Metrics review: shortform (30 mins)
Note: Metrics review alternates weeks with launch review, in which we
review upcoming launches and overall roadmap status
Leadership recruiting weekly update (10 mins)
Internal audit quarterly update (10 mins)
Topic from CEO (10 mins)
Review top goals and strategic priorities (60–120 mins)
Standing questions
QBR reflections from the past week
Are there any snippets to share with the wider leadership team or company-
wide?
Are there any topics discussed that anyone objects to being passed down
in staff meetings?
What decisions were made? Is there anything we should clearly
communicate to the wider leadership team?
Customer issues
Short summary of key customer issue, actions, and owner

===== Book page 372 =====
Customer wins
Short summary of key customer wins and contributors
Snippets
Executive team member name:
Assigned action item updates—also in tracker
General updates (e.g., whereabouts, travel plans, offsites)
Potential topics for discussion and why they should be discussed
Major company or product initiative status and learnings or customer
contract negotiation status and learnings
Top-level notes from a customer meeting or external event
Launch, event, or PR plans in flight
Info on top talent
Stripe’s Unblocking Process
David Singleton, Stripe’s CTO, created this process to help unblock a decision
when individuals, groups, or teams are unable to agree on a path forward and
have already tried to find a solution collaboratively.
First, try to solve locally
Stripes make thousands of decisions every day, and the vast majority are
reversible or tunable. For these kinds of decisions, we should optimize for
speed: Make the decision and iterate quickly.
If you find yourself involved in a disagreement over a reversible decision, ask if it
really matters. If we iterate over time, will we get to an optimal endpoint either
way? If so, maybe this decision isn’t a big deal. Second, ask yourself if it’s truly
important. Can the folks who will do the majority of the work move forward on a

===== Book page 373 =====
1.1
1.2
1.3
2.1
2.2
2.3
path that any dissenters can commit to supporting, even if those who disagree
might have chosen another path if they were doing the bulk of the work?
If you’re making a multi-constituency decision that is important and is not easily
reversed, taking some time to debate makes sense. If that doesn’t quickly result
in a decision, kick off the unblocking process!
Unblocking is not bad. Slow, unclear, or bad decisions are bad. For meaningful,
irreversible decisions, we’d rather involve people responsible from “both sides”
than hinder forward progress, move in the wrong direction, or hurt trust
between teams and individuals.
We experience a real cost—both in lost productivity and in diminished
happiness—when teams don’t agree and can’t move forward without resolving a
decision. Therefore, if you find yourself in a position where you’re blocked by
the lack of a resolved decision, it’s your duty to instigate this process. We
request that once you have identified an area of misalignment, you work with
your coworker(s) and commit to resolving it within five business days of kicking
off the unblocking process. (In cases bound by a lack of data, the commitment
is to align on how to answer within five days of the data being available.)
How to unblock
1. Document the disagreement together. This document can be extremely
short. Half a page is fine. Outline:
The problem to be solved (ideally described as the goal of the joint
enterprise in the voice of the user).?
The options considered.?
The trade-offs both parties see between the options. Highlight the
trade-offs that could not be resolved without further help.?
2. Sometimes producing this document will result in agreement. If so, great!
But if it doesn’t, email it to your managers.
If the authors report to different managers, the document should be
sent to both managers.?
The managers might decide to call a meeting.?
If escalating to a single manager, the expectation is that they’ll make a
decision. If escalating to multiple managers, they’ll hopefully decide
together. But if they can’t reach an agreement, they should raise the

===== Book page 374 =====
issue with their respective managers recursively (possibly adding more
context to the unblocking doc) until a decision is reached (or the stack
overflows).?
Unblocking should be bilateral but can be unilateral
1. If one of the parties declines to unblock jointly, the other person should
inform them that they’ll do it alone and invite the other party once again to
bring the matter “up” together.
2. If the reluctant party continues to refuse, the other may then unblock
unilaterally, with the other party copied on cc.
Is this a request to unblock?
If you’re raising an issue with a manager and you might then present their
feedback as a decision to an individual or group that you know or suspect
disagrees with your stance, that is a request to unblock. The other party should
be present for the discussion.
What to do if you get a unilateral request to unblock
To support this process, all managers must refuse to listen to any argument
brought to them unilaterally unless they obtain an affirmative answer to the
following questions:
1. Have you and your colleague tried to resolve this problem using
constructive negotiation? If the answer is no, please try that first.
2. Have you tried to use the unblocking process, and have you written an
unblocking document with your colleague? If the answer is no, please do
that first.
3. Have you tried Step 2 and told your colleague that if they didn’t use the
unblocking process, you would bring the problem to me alone? If the
answer is no, please tell them first.
If the manager gets three yeses, they should message the missing colleague
and ask them to attend. This sets a cultural norm: It’s not acceptable to refuse

===== Book page 375 =====
to unblock jointly.
Example
The details of this example are fictional.
Charlie works on the widget product team and Alice works on the storage team.
Charlie and Alice have different managers, Chun and Aiden, respectively. Chun
and Aiden both share the same manager, Bharath.
Charlie is implementing a new set of features that require the storage of mass-
market end user personally identifiable information (PII) and has received
guidance from product counsel that this data should be encrypted at rest.
Charlie consults with Alice to get her opinion on how to store this PII, and Alice
advises that the current storage systems do not do encryption at rest. However,
it’s on the team’s roadmap, and Charlie should wait until it’s supported. Alice
offers to expedite the development of this feature so it could be available for
Charlie to try out in a few months’ time.
Charlie says that’s a problem, as the widget team wants to launch an internal
alpha no later than two months from today. He proposes instead that the
product team stand up a new storage system and build their own encryption at
rest support. Alice thinks this is a bad idea and shares concerns about how this
would be supported and maintained in the long term. Alice also thinks the
amount of work it would take to build the key management system and integrate
with the systems that the storage team has built around personal data deletion
and compliance is being underestimated. Charlie and Alice do not reach an
agreement on the best path forward.
Charlie brings up the need to build a new storage system supporting encryption
at rest to his direct manager, Chun, mentioning that it will speed up
development significantly. He notes that Alice was pushing for another path and
that they have failed to agree on the way forward.
Chun asks Charlie if he has tried to resolve the disagreement using constructive
negotiation with Alice. Because Charlie has tried that already, Chun then asks
Charlie to use the escalation process described in this document.
Charlie and Alice write the following cosigned document. In writing the
document, they collaboratively ask themselves, “What are we really trying to
do?” and manage to frame the discussion in terms of a goal, the crux of the
decision sought, and the trade-offs inherent in each path.

===== Book page 376 =====
Fictional example document
Stripe alignment model
Authors
Alice, Storage
Charlie, Widget
Date: May 31
Goal
Deploy a widget system that meets encryption at rest needs in a
timely fashion.
Decision sought
Whether to build and deploy a new storage system supporting
encryption at rest in time for widget’s internal trial in July.
Options considered
A. Wait for the storage team to deploy encryption at rest on their
existing system, which will push the widget trial to September at the
earliest.
B. Deploy a new instance of MySQL Enterprise with transparent data
encryption, to be maintained by the widget team.
Trade-offs
Option A:
Explanation of why the widget trial’s July deadline is important.
Link to docs for planned encryption at rest feature on the storage
team’s stack rank.
Option B:
Explanation of how MySQL Enterprise would be deployed (mostly
provided by Charlie, but Alice agrees that it captures the state
accurately).

===== Book page 377 =====
List of the key management, maintenance, and systems
integration tasks of concern (mostly provided by Alice, but Charlie
and Alice agree on listing them).
Charlie and Alice jointly email the doc to both of their managers. Chun, Charlie’s
manager, suggests meeting in person to resolve the disagreement.
Charlie, Alice, Chun, and Aiden meet and review the document together. Both
Chun and Aiden ask clarifying questions and make some live edits to the
document for completeness. Ultimately, they don’t agree on the best path
forward after this brief discussion, so they agree to take the escalation to their
manager, Bharath. (This scenario, with the mutual managers escalating to their
shared manager, is expected to be an exception rather than the norm. It’s
detailed here for illustrative purposes.)
Chun sends the document via email to Bharath with Charlie, Alice, and Aiden on
cc. Bharath reviews the document and decides that the widget team should not
stand up a new storage system and Option A should be chosen. Bharath
documents the rationale in reply to the escalation email. The group moves
forward with this decision, and Chun and Charlie commit to following this
course.

===== Book page 378 =====
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
Notes
Michael Lewis, “What Keeps Bill Parcells Awake at Night,” New York Times Magazine,
October 29, 2006, https://www.nytimes.com/2006/10/29/sports/playmagazine/what-
keeps-bill-parcells-awake-at-night.html.
Patrick Lencioni, The Five Dysfunctions of a Team: A Leadership Fable (San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass, 2012).
Max Landsberg, The Tools of Leadership: Vision, Inspiration, Momentum (London:
Profile Books, 2011), 51–55.
Jeff Bezos, “Amazon.com 1997 Letter to Shareholders,” US Securities and Exchange
Commission, https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1018724/0001193125165309-
10/d168744dex991.htm.
Bruce W. Tuckman, “Developmental Sequence in Small Groups,” Psychological Bulletin
63, no. 6 (1965): 384–399, https://doi.org/10.1037/h0022100.
Charles Duhigg, “What Google Learned from Its Quest to Build the Perfect Team,” New
York Times Magazine, February 25, 2016,
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/28/magazine/what-google-learned-from-its-quest-
to-build-the-perfect-team.html.
Claire Hughes Johnson, “Claire’s Offsite Toolkit,” Coda,
https://coda.io/@clairehughesjohnson/claires-offsite-toolkit.
Khosla Ventures, “Running an Effective Staff Meeting | Claire Hughes Johnson,”
YouTube Video, 26:41, July 21, 2018, https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=GIiaFW874q8.
Tuckman, “Developmental Sequence in Small Groups,” 396.
Paul Graham, “Maker’s Schedule, Manager’s Schedule,” PaulGraham.com, July 2009,
http://www.paulgraham.com/makersschedule.html.
“Rapid: Bain’s Tool to Clarify Decision Accountability,” Bain, August 11, 2011,
https://www.bain.com/insights/rapid-tool-to-clarify-decision-accountability.
Gokul Rajaram, “Gokul’s S.P.A.D.E. Toolkit: How to Implement Square’s Famous
Decision-Making Framework,” Coda, https://coda.io/@gokulrajaram/gokuls-spade-
toolkit.

===== Book page 379 =====
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
“How to Master the Seven-Step Problem-Solving Process,” McKinsey & Company,
September 13, 2019, https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/strategy-and-
corporate-finance/our-insights/how-to-master-the-seven-step-problem-solving-
process.
Lencioni, Five Dysfunctions, 135.
David Singleton, “Stripe’s Fifth Engineering Hub Is Remote,” Stripe Blog, May 2, 2019,
https://stripe.com/blog/remote-hub.
Geert Hofstede, “National Culture,” Hofstede Insights, https://hi.hofstede-
insights.com/national-culture.
Matt Mullenweg, The Distributed Podcast, https://distributed.blog.
“The Remote Playbook,” GitLab, https://about.gitlab.com/company/culture/all-remote.
Harvard Business School professor Frances Frei once shared with me this
(paraphrased) observation from Carol Dweck, who is best known for her work on
developing a growth mindset: “There are two types of parenting, and one is right. You
can either prepare the path for the child or prepare the child for the path.” (The correct
answer: Prepare the child for the path.) As a manager, I think you need to pay attention
to both dimensions: Sometimes your role is to prepare the path for your team, but
above all, you must prepare your team for the path.
Rebecca Solnit, Hope in the Dark: Untold Histories, Wild Possibilities (Chicago:
Haymarket Books, 2016), 20.
For example, Sundiatu Dixon-Fyle et al., “Diversity Wins: How Inclusion Matters,”
McKinsey & Company, May 19, 2020, https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-
insights/diversity-and-inclusion/diversity-wins-how-inclusion-matters.
Amy C. Edmondson, The Fearless Organization: Creating Psychological Safety in the
Workplace for Learning, Innovation, and Growth (Hoboken: Wiley, 2018).
“Key Findings: Being Black in Corporate America: An Intersectional Exploration.”
Coqual, 2019, https://coqual.org/wp-
content/uploads/2020/09/CoqualBeingBlackinCorporateAmerica090720-1.pdf.
Justin Dean et al., “The Real Reason Diversity Is Lacking at the Top,” BCG, November
19, 2020, https://www.bcg.com/publications/2020/why-is-diversity-lacking-at-top-of-
corporations.
Frances Frei and Anne Morriss, Unleashed: The Unapologetic Leader’s Guide to
Empowering Everyone Around You (Boston: Harvard Business Review Press, 2020).

===== Book page 380 =====
65.
66.
David Foster Wallace, This Is Water: Some Thoughts, Delivered on a Significant Occasion,
About Living a Compassionate Life (London: Little, Brown, 2009).
Chloé Valdary, “Activist to Artist,” The Theory of Enchantment,
https://theoryofenchantment.com/about.
OceanofPDF.com

