===== Book page 449 =====
Usually, this decision comes out of the inquiry phase of your
performance feedback conversation. For example, when you ask
whether the employee feels their role is right for them, they may
answer that they’re not sure. That’s a chance to take a step back and
walk through their capabilities—refer to the self-awareness analysis
of skills and capabilities in Chapter 1—and think about a role they
might shine in. I’ve seen many examples of people in customer-
facing roles who realize that they actually enjoy the analysis,
process, and strategic aspects of the customer work more than
interacting with the customers. In these cases, the employee might
be better suited to sales operations than to frontline sales.
This approach can be tricky because it requires the right roles to
be open, and there’s a chance that you might disappoint the person.
For these reasons, it should be time-bound. You might also benefit
from an HR team member’s counsel. If you do identify a role that
might be a better fit for the employee, you’ll also want to work with
the recruiting team, since there should be a process for internal
mobility into open roles.
Managing managers
Now 
that 
we’ve 
discussed the 
primary 
actions 
and key
conversations for managing individuals, I want to spend a bit of time
on managing managers. Although many of the fundamentals are
similar, managing managers can require a major tactical adjustment.
When I first started managing managers, I reached out to a coach
and told him, stressed, that I couldn’t keep track of the details of my
team’s work anymore. Worse, I didn’t feel like I was contributing to
the work in any meaningful way. My days had become walls of
meetings. After some back and forth, he said, “You have to move
from being a captain to a colonel.” He meant that I had to make a
===== Book page 450 =====
mental shift from being in the weeds with my team’s work to
implementing a system that helped me stay involved enough that I
could unblock and coach my teams, but not so involved that I was
doing everyone’s job for them. I also had to transition from
managing to leading: setting the vision for our division and creating
outlines with goals and measurement metrics, but not tactically
solving every technical problem.
The main goal when managing managers is to be their coach,
sounding board, and unblocker so that they can achieve their own
goals and those of their team. For the most part, this means having
1:1s that are more about coaching than solving, and framing your
own role in the process with the right mindset.
How to think about managing managers
Managers will often come to you with a management problem. Your
first instinct might be to say, “Here’s how you solve it.” Instead, try
saying “What are you going to do?” Ideally, you’ll coach these
managers through solving their own problems. Don’t just teach
them how to fish; teach them how to steer the fishing boat. Use
Toyota’s Five Whys method: Ask “Why?” at least five times to get to
the root of the issue.76 Most people know the answer; you just have
to ask the question. If they don’t, help steer them toward identifying
the problem, then coach them to their own solution.
Sometimes, when someone is frustrated or I feel impatient with
this process, I’ll say, “Do you want me to tell you what I think the
answer is, or do you want to tell me first?” This usually elicits a
laugh because you’re getting meta about the whole dynamic, and
people appreciate you calling it out.
Individual 1:1s versus manager 1:1s
===== Book page 451 =====
INDIVIDUAL CONTRIBUTOR 1:1
MANAGER 1:1
Where is my time going?
How do I solve X?
What’s your feedback on
this document I wrote?
What work should I
prioritize?
What is success in a year?
Are we making progress against our
long-term goals?
Do we have the right systems in
place?
Are my instincts right on X?
Do I have the right team and
capabilities in my organization?
Table 10. Example topics discussed in individual contributor 1:1s and manager 1:1s.
Once you start managing managers, your 1:1 time will shift from
solving more technical problems (“I don’t have enough time to get
through my support tickets”) to more adaptive ones (“I think we’re
building the wrong product”). Table 10 above offers some examples
of questions you might address in an individual contributor 1:1
versus in a manager 1:1.
In both situations, don’t forget to ask how someone is doing. I
generally tell folks, especially more experienced people, that the 1:1
is their time. We set up a mutual doc that we can both edit, and we
track action items and link out to goals and career conversation
notes. Beyond that, I ask the individual to propose each 1:1 agenda,
and I only edit the doc to add in agenda item suggestions when I
have them.
Whether the other person proposes it or not, 1:1s should start
with two things: asking how someone is doing—checking in really
matters—and agreeing on the most important item to discuss and
talking about it first. This might take the whole meeting, and that’s
okay. Better than a rushed conversation in which someone tells you
the truly heavy, important thing in the final five minutes.
===== Book page 452 =====
Managing when you’re not the expert
Once you start managing managers, you’ll often encounter
situations where you haven’t done the day-to-day job of the team
you’re managing. Every healthy manager-report relationship
requires that both parties feel they’re getting value out of it. In cases
where you aren’t an expert on the functional role, your value-add
will not be knowledge specific to the role but rather your availability
as a thinking partner on broader skills: strategy, communication,
problem-solving, management, and so on. Awareness of your own
strengths is helpful here. (Operating Principle 1!) If you’re
particularly good at communicating hard decisions, for example,
that might be something you can help your report with.
There are a lot of non-skill-related areas where you can add
value. These might include:
Introducing your report to leaders or other parts of the
organization
Helping them navigate the company to get things done
Generating excitement around the thing they’re doing
Getting them resources
Unblocking them
Providing them with useful feedback by doing skip levels,
observing their team, and bringing broader context into your
performance management conversations
If you don’t have the required expertise, your main job is to find
them the help they need. Whether it’s an outside mentor or a
colleague of yours, make sure they get the resources they require to
succeed. Be sure to set expectations up front in terms of how you
expect you’ll be able to provide the most value to them as a manager.
You can do this through your “Working with Me” document or in an
===== Book page 453 =====
early 1:1. For example, in my “Working with Claire” document, I
write:
I expect you are making decisions a lot without me, and
if you come to me, I’ll usually put it back on you with
“What do you want to do?” or “What should you do?” and
help you decide. That said, if there is a big decision
brewing, I’d love to know about it, and I’m always here
to talk it out. I like to know what’s going on with you
and your team.
Finally, spend time on the ground. You may not have the
opportunity to work your way up on the front lines before becoming
a manager, but you can dedicate a few hours to doing the team’s
daily tasks.
I recently spent two hours with a talented individual on Stripe’s
risk operations team. When a business signs up for a Stripe account,
Stripe performs checks to ensure that the business is legitimate and
that we’re able to process payments for them. Most of these checks
happen automatically and via machine learning algorithms, but
sometimes a human will review an account. I learned more about
Stripe’s risk practices in those two hours than from any number of
presentations on the topic in the prior two years. You’ll also get a lot
of bonus points for sharing your observations with the team’s
manager.
A more in-depth version would be what our CEO Patrick
Collison does. He calls it an “engineerication,” and it’s exactly what
it sounds like: He blocks time on his calendar as if he’s on vacation,
but instead he spends three to five days acting as an engineer on a
team within the company. Every time he does this, he returns
energized by what he’s learned—usually a lot about how to improve
===== Book page 454 =====
engineering productivity—and by how things have changed, usually
for the better, since his last such foray.
Managing out, firing, and layoffs
Now we can return to Outcome 3 from the section on managing low
performers. Sometimes you’ve implemented all of the appropriate
feedback, coaching, and formal performance review processes for a
low-performing report and it’s clear that the person has not
succeeded in improving and needs to leave the company. In some
cases, you and the person may mutually realize that it’s time for
them to leave either before or during the performance feedback
process. But sometimes it’s on you to deliver the news that they’ve
failed in their bid to improve. In either case, facilitating the
departure of someone from your company takes work.
Most of the time you can manage someone out, meaning you and
your report come to the conclusion that they should leave the
company. When you manage someone out, you likely won’t need to
have a formal termination conversation. By the time you have the
“you should leave” conversation, you should be confident that the
employee should no longer work at the company, and ideally both
you and the employee have had conversations that led to this
decision organically. Other times, albeit rarely, you may need to have
a formal termination conversation. Firing someone is probably one
of the hardest things you will have to do as a manager, so pull in the
support you need from your own manager and your HR department,
if you have one, for help making the decision or to have a practice
conversation, for example.
Having to fire someone is always a good reminder of how
important it is to hire the right people in the first place. Still, it’s an
essential task of running a good organization. Barring a perfect
===== Book page 455 =====
hiring process—which I have yet to see—there will be people at your
company who don’t work out. Letting bad hires linger leaves
organizational scars that take a surprisingly long time to heal. High
performers will see that low performers aren’t being managed out
and will get demoralized. If your bad hire is at a senior level, they
may hire others who also don’t meet the bar for your organization.
These hires can have a residual impact that takes years to undo.
It’s crucial to fire fast but fire well. How you treat forced
departures reflects on you, your team, and your company. The best
outcome is for both you and the employee to agree that they should
leave.
Just as it’s best to chart a process for handling a low-
performance situation, it’s helpful to follow clear steps when you’re
moving someone out of the company. This shouldn’t be a lengthy
process—it should involve just a few clear steps that are the
culmination of your feedback work:
1. Pre-work: feedback, documentation, and preparation
2. The departure conversation
3. Logistics and next steps
Pre-work: feedback, documentation, and preparation
Your pre-work for managing out a low performer consists of the
performance management steps we’ve discussed in this chapter. It
also includes ensuring that you’ve informed the right people and
gathered any related prior information and work product.
Your preparation should involve:
Assembling all written feedback on performance issues and, if
relevant, prior performance improvement plans and results
Familiarizing yourself with local employment laws (most
countries have protected classes and discrimination laws, and
===== Book page 456 =====
some have intricate termination processes)
Informing your manager and your HR partner, if you haven’t
already
The departure conversation
Managing out people in junior roles tends to be straightforward.
Because the requirements of these roles are more standardized, it’s
easier to demonstrate when an employee hasn’t been meeting those
standards. And because these roles don’t have many dependencies,
there’s often no need to discuss transition plans other than how to
communicate their departure.
The more senior the employee, the lengthier and more complex
the managing-out conversation tends to be. Usually, if a senior
employee isn’t meeting the demands of their role, it’s not because
they’re incapable of doing so; they were likely high performers in
their previous roles, or they wouldn’t have a senior position at your
company. In these cases, you’ll need to discuss their performance
issues in terms of this specific role and company. The departure of a
senior leader will also have an impact on many individuals, so part
of your managing-out process will need to focus on the transition
plan.
Either way, having these conversations can be difficult, so I’ve
outlined approaches you can take to both (note that these apply in
markets without intricate laws with respect to employee
termination):
Junior-level conversations (one to two conversations)
Start 
the 
conversation 
by 
summarizing 
the 
performance
improvement plan and what you both had agreed to with regard to
meeting the terms of the plan. Ask the report what they think about
===== Book page 457 =====
their progress. For instance, you can ask, “How do you think things
have been going in terms of meeting the goals we discussed?”
Sometimes the employee will proactively suggest that they want
to leave the company. If so, move on to discussing departure
communications and logistics. Otherwise, explain that you haven’t
seen them make enough progress to make you feel confident that
they can perform in this role. You can say something like “I haven’t
seen enough progress to make me confident that you can meet the
demands of this role. I don’t think it’s going to work out here, and I
want to agree on a timeline for your departure.”
This is not up for discussion. You’ve made your decision and
there’s no room for negotiation. Try to move quickly from the
decision—“I think it’s time for you to leave this role”—to planning
the person’s departure. (In some countries, this also means
negotiating an exit package. Either way, be firm.)
At this point, your report will likely respond in one of two ways:
They’ll start re-litigating. This happens less than 5 percent of
the time. Sometimes they’ll contest your decision or get angry at
you or at the company. Continue to be kind but firm. Reiterate
the reasons why you made this decision, remind them of the
process you both undertook to address the concerns, and be
clear that it was not successful. End by repeating your decision
and some variation of “I’m sorry, but I don’t see another path.”
They’ll start talking about next steps for their departure.
How much flexibility you give the person to plan their departure
depends on company (and sometimes regulatory) policy. Some
companies have strict guidelines around when and how people
should depart. I have a preference for allowing people to control
what they can still control. This will move the conversation more
===== Book page 458 =====
quickly to constructive tactics: How do you want to inform
people? When will your last day be? How can I help you?
Sometimes you’ll have a second conversation to hash out final
departure logistics. Try to complete the conversation in two sittings.
There are a few exceptions, both rare:
Your employee hints at or outright threatens legal action. (More
on this in a moment.)
Your employee shares new information that causes you to
reconsider your decision, so you need to gather additional data
before continuing the discussion.
I’ll say it again: Don’t let the process drag out. The person being
managed out will not be productive or happy at this stage, and you
should help them move on so that they can join a company where
they can be. The longer an underperforming employee remains on
your team, the greater the damage will be to the rest of the
organization.
Senior-level departure conversations
Senior employee firing tends to be a conversation that takes place
over the course of a few months and most often will not involve a
formal performance improvement plan. This is one of those rare
manager situations where it’s okay for things to be left unsaid. Half
of the time, the leader will see the writing on the wall and volunteer
that it may be time to leave, in which case there’s no need to tell
them that you were thinking of firing them anyway. This is a great
outcome for both of you because the senior leader will be more
willing to work with you on a smooth transition plan.
These conversations will usually involve the two of you
discussing the needs of the role and whether you both think they are
===== Book page 459 =====
being met. This takes at least two or three conversations. Make sure
HR is aware that you’re embarking on this discussion. Ideally, you
and the leader will jointly come to the conclusion that the role is not
right for them. Remember, it’s not about the person, it’s about the
gap between the role, the company’s needs, and the performance
you’re observing.
In the event that you and the senior leader are not seeing eye to
eye, you have to be firmer. Be direct and say something like “I don’t
see us closing the gap between what’s needed and what you’re
delivering.” At this point, you’ll want to start moving to the logistics
of the departure: “Let’s start talking about your timing and your
transition plan.” Ego preservation often kicks in for the leader at this
point and they’ll want to start thinking about the best way to depart.
Depending on how mutual the situation is, there may or may not
be some negotiation required to finalize their departure—anything
from severance to medical insurance to the timing of their
departure, especially if there are upcoming stock vesting dates. The
less mutual it is, the more you should expect to negotiate. In this
situation, the best tool at your disposal is a severance matrix, the
framework your HR and employment legal teams should have
developed for what might be offered for a termination departure.
Refer to that framework and use it as a backstop. If the negotiation
is a tricky one, it’s sometimes best to involve your HR or
employment legal partner, if you have one, to help run interference
and enforce the matrix.
Legal considerations
An employee might threaten legal action when you attempt to
manage them out. If this happens, the best thing to do is to make
sure you have the right support—usually from your HR and legal
===== Book page 460 =====
teams or external counsel—to help you manage the situation. It’s
important that you:
Understand the employment laws of your country. Seek out
this information at the start of the managing-out process.
Familiarize yourself with basic employment law, discrimination
law, and protected classes.
Look out for words like “retaliation” or “discrimination.” If
these come up in the conversation with your employee, the best
thing to do is generally to pause the conversation. Let the
employee know that this is not the conversation you were
expecting to have and that it probably makes sense to continue it
with the right people in the room. Include your HR and legal
teams in future conversations or let them take the next steps
without you.
“I had to act quickly, but in a very respectful way. It
doesn’t mean that if it doesn’t work out with someone
that they’re bad people. I’m very human this way, but I
also have to put my foot down. It’s like ‘No. That’s not
working out. This is not the vision. This is not how we
treat people, and this is not how we run a business.’ ”
—Dominique Crenn, owner and chef, Atelier Crenn, Michelin three-star restaurant
Gross misconduct and layoffs
There are two other types of termination conversations: firing for
gross misconduct and layoffs. Although it’s less common for a
manager to handle these conversations, it’s helpful to be prepared to
understand them should they arise.
Firing for gross misconduct
===== Book page 461 =====
If someone has clearly violated your company’s code of conduct, the
termination conversation is usually straightforward, although it
might come after an internal investigation and thus occur some days
after the incident was observed, discovered, or reported. I
recommend having one conversation in which you explain that the
person has violated the code of conduct and lay out the terms of
departure. Because these sorts of violations are severe, I recommend
that you plan for the employee to leave the same day.
In the case of an investigation, you might notify the person that
there has been an accusation that they violated the code of conduct
and that there will be an investigation to interview them and anyone
who was involved or who might have witnessed the violation. Let
them know that you will inform them of the conclusion of the
investigation within, say, 24 hours. Try to make the waiting time
short. If it’s determined that they did not violate the code of conduct
or if the investigation is inconclusive, then you likely need to have a
feedback conversation about the perception that they committed a
violation and what they might do differently in the future. And yes,
this means you need to have a code of conduct.
Layoffs
Since layoffs are often accompanied by broader changes to the
organization—see the section on managing through uncertainty on
page 323—there’s generally an overarching communication and
change management plan you should follow. A layoff is not a firing;
it’s a role elimination due to restructuring, and it must meet those
standards. This plan is best directed by the company’s HR and legal
teams, or outside consultants if you don’t have in-house HR and
legal support. The communications should be tightly managed.
When something bad happens to an employee
===== Book page 462 =====
I once opened Slack to find a message from a woman I work with:
“My dad didn’t wake up today.” Six words was all it took to convey
that someone’s life had completely changed.
Horrible things happen, and every tragedy is unique. But there
are, generally, three types of tough situations you may find yourself
handling as a manager:
A one-time event (e.g., death of a family member or friend,
miscarriage, severe injury, divorce, lawsuit)
Hopefully you’ve put in the work—through your 1:1s, expectation-
setting, and working together—to develop a relationship where your
report trusts you enough to share with you. In these situations,
being able to relate to your reports really matters. First and
foremost, be empathetic and express an appropriate reaction. Then
ask the person what they need and how they want to be supported.
Finally, figure out what resources you can get them and how you and
the team can help take over their work so that they have the time to
figure things out. Don’t ask about timelines or work handover
immediately. Usually, folks will let you know how much time they
think they need and how to transition their work after a few days.
An ongoing hardship (e.g., mental illness, a sick family member, a
failing relationship, substance abuse)
These situations are often trickier to manage because the employee
may not be telling you what’s going on with them. It’s your job to be
an observer of the people you work with and track their behavior. If
you think something is wrong, check in with the person and use
some of the tips from the sections on coaching and feedback. Don’t
invade someone’s privacy; instead, share an observation. Sometimes
it helps to share that you’ve observed a change in their behavior and
you wonder whether it’s because of an external factor. You could say,
===== Book page 463 =====
“I’ve noticed that it seems like you’re struggling with getting to work
on time for your first meeting. Is that true, and can I help in some
way?” Or “I’ve noticed that you seem a little down and distracted. I
don’t want to pry into anything private, but I’m worried that
something may be going on outside of work that is impacting your
work. Can I help?”
Nine times out of ten, the person is just waiting for you to notice,
and they do want to talk about it. Other times they might deny
what’s going on. In those cases, you’ll have to decide how severe you
think the issue is. For example, extremely out-of-character behavior
might indicate a mental health issue, and you’ll need to decide
whether to involve your HR team.
Balance your empathy with the demands of the business. If
someone needs to take time off work, help them get the right
resources, but also let them know how you’re going to get the work
done while they’re gone (which may mean hiring someone to fill in).
An employee’s experience has legal ramifications (e.g., sexual
harassment, discrimination)
This is not mutually exclusive to these other two points. Make sure
you know your legal obligations to the company. For example, in
California, if an employee comes to you reporting sexual
harassment, you must make that report known by law. I’ve had
employees start to disclose something to me and say, “I want to tell
you about something that happened, but you can’t tell anyone.” I’ve
had to stop them and explain, “I may or may not be able to commit
to that,” then remind them of my obligations and make other
company resources known (an anonymous reporting tool, for
example, or HR). This last point is also very important: Whenever
an employee comes to you and alleges any kind of workplace abuse,
===== Book page 464 =====
you should ensure that the employee has access to the right
resources to address this problem.
No matter the situation, don’t compartmentalize and go on with
your day if something is really off. Stop, trust your intuition, and
seek help. The worst mistake is to fail to act in these situations.
That said, make sure not to be alarmist, and keep information
confidential. You shouldn’t recount individual stories that include
personal details to other managers. Instead, contact HR or any
external advisers on human resources and legal matters your
company has, and find the best resources you can offer.
Occasionally, it may make sense to share the situation with your
own manager, but do so with respect to confidentiality and don’t
over-disclose. These scenarios are probably as good a time as any to
apply the golden rule: Treat others as you would like to be treated.
Be human.
By way of example, I once had an employee in a critical role who
didn’t show up to work. No notice, no appearances for a few days. I
started to get very worried that something had happened to them,
and I had to explain their absence to the team and to the peer teams
we worked with. One peer was the person responsible for a key
project this employee worked on, and thus was their dotted-line
manager. When I explained that the employee had not shown up to
work for a few days with no notice, the other manager shook his
head and said, “When you get into management, no one tells you
that sometimes people go missing.” It really put things into
perspective.
Ultimately, HR helped me work with our security team to
conduct a wellness check at their home. The employee was not
there, but we were able to contact their family and determine that
===== Book page 465 =====
the employee was handling a very difficult mental health issue. In
this case, HR, my manager, and I decided that it was best that this
person didn’t return to work, and the employee agreed. I then had to
explain to the person’s team and coworkers that they were leaving
the company for personal reasons and that some team members
would need to take over some of this person’s responsibilities in the
short term. I remember thinking that I thought I’d seen a lot as a
people manager, but clearly not everything. Hard things happen.
“I think the best lesson I can give is: If you want to be a
leader, ask yourself why. What are the rewards?
The real reason you should want to do this is because it
gives you the ability to have an impact that enriches and
improves the lives of others. I saw that early on. That’s
why I wanted to hire and support really strong people. If
you can do that and you have enough self-confidence to
be in a room full of people who might be smarter than
you, then you can lift an institution.”
—Dan Weiss, president and CEO, Metropolitan Museum of Art
Some final thoughts on management
Rereading this chapter, part of me wondered whether it might be off-
putting to aspiring managers. Great management takes a lot of work,
and leadership is another job on top of that. What I haven’t made
explicit in the preceding pages is how rewarding it is.
During my move from Google to Stripe, I was packing up some
personal items from my desk when I came upon an envelope. It was
full of handwritten notes from the people I’d managed over the
===== Book page 466 =====
years. I thought about recycling it, but I just couldn’t. This was the
purest expression of my work.
Management touches people. If it’s successful, it affects their
lives and trajectories for the good. My parents are both teachers, and
as is typical, I resisted following their path. Yet here I am, doing
something very akin to teaching, with a similar potential for
personal reward through its impact on others. You never know when
all the time you’ve put in to help someone be their best will pay off
—but when it does, months or even years later, it can mean
everything. Maybe to them, but definitely to you.
===== Book page 467 =====
EXERCISES AND TEMPLATES
—
Chapter 5
Performance Review Template
Compensation Conversations Preparation and Guide
Performance Improvement Documentation Templates
Performance Improvement Plan Template
Managing Out Checklist
To access printer-friendly versions of these worksheets, go to
http://press.stripe.com/scaling-people/workbooks.
===== Book page 468 =====
Performance Review
Template
This template is meant to help managers create an outline for a written
performance review. It will also help them prepare for calibration conversations.
Consider including links to guidance on job ladder expectations and how to set
performance designations for managers to consult.
Name:
Current level:
Start date in role:
How long they were here during the review period: (Note whether the review
period was less than a half-year and consider any time on leave.)
Proposed designation:
Proposed promotion (yes or no):
In one sentence, why did you not choose a higher designation? 
(N/A for “greatly exceeds”)
In one sentence, why did you not choose a lower designation? 
(N/A for “does not meet”)
In one sentence, summarize the takeaway you want to deliver to this person
with this half’s designation and review: 
(You should communicate this to the person during their review.)
Impact
Using the template questions below, describe the 2–3 projects or areas where
the person had the most impact this half. Keep in mind that company-building
work, including mentorship, recruiting, and diversity, equity, and inclusion, should
be included here if they made significant contributions.
Area for impact 1: Describe briefly here.
===== Book page 469 =====
Name/description of project/area, including relevant context (e.g., size of
project, level of difficulty, etc.).
What was the duration of their contribution?
Who were the key collaborators or stakeholders?
What was their role and expectation for impact in this area?
What was the resulting impact, and were expectations met? If not, why not?
Include relevant metrics if possible.
Area for impact 2: Describe briefly here.
Name/description of project/area, including relevant context (e.g., size of
project, level of difficulty, etc.).
What was the duration of their contribution?
Who were the key collaborators or stakeholders?
What was their role and expectation for impact in this area?
What was the resulting impact, and were expectations met? If not, why not?
Include relevant metrics if possible.
Area for impact 3: Describe briefly here.
Name/description of project/area, including relevant context (e.g., size of
project, level of difficulty, etc.).
What was the duration of their contribution?
Who were the key collaborators or stakeholders?
What was their role and expectation for impact in this area?
What was the resulting impact, and were expectations met? If not, why not?
Include relevant metrics if possible.
Strengths
Describe which 1–2 strengths this person demonstrated during the review
period and provide an approximate designation for that strength relative to their
===== Book page 470 =====
current level. In identifying strengths, consider, but don’t feel limited to, the core
capabilities of the role.
For each strength, provide a short summary referencing 1–2 supporting
examples. If the person is a people manager, consider the manager ladder and
principles in your assessment.
Strength 1: Describe briefly here.
Approximate designation (partially meets, successfully meets, etc.) for this
strength
Summary, including 1–2 examples
Strength 2: Describe briefly here.
Approximate designation for this strength
Summary, including 1–2 examples
Development areas
Describe which 1–2 development areas this person demonstrated during the
review period and provide an approximate designation for that development
area relative to their current level. If a person did well overall, development
areas may be all “successfully” or even “exceeds” or “greatly exceeds”; if they
did not, they may be “partially” or “does not meet” relative to their current level.
In identifying development areas, consider, but don’t feel limited to, the core
capabilities of the role.
For each development area, provide a short summary referencing 1–2
supporting examples. If the person is a people manager, consider the manager
ladder and manager principles in your assessment.
Development area 1: Describe briefly here.
Approximate designation for this development area
Summary, including 1–2 examples
Ideas for how to improve
Development area 2: Describe briefly here.
===== Book page 471 =====
Approximate designation for this development area
Summary, including 1–2 examples
Ideas for how to improve
Promotion proposal: yes or no
If no:
When might they be ready to uplevel (H1, H2, or later)?
Briefly, what do they need to do for promotion in the future or, for higher
levels, to grow in their career?
If yes:
How long has the person been demonstrating next-level capabilities and
behaviors?
Provide 1–2 examples of how this person has been demonstrating next-level
capabilities and behaviors.
In 1–2 sentences, what is the primary area for development at the next
level? (This is not meant to prevent upleveling but to proactively identify
next steps in the person’s career development.)
Compensation
Conversations Preparation
and Guide
Compensation conversations link pay to performance and influence individuals’
sense of trust and fairness. They are among the most critical discussions a
manager has. The purpose of this document is to help you prepare, especially
for what may be tougher conversations.
===== Book page 472 =====
Timeline and resources
Outline your company timeline and link to any important resources, such as fact
pages about your compensation program and manager education guides.
Preparation
Be sure you understand and can explain the compensation philosophy.
Prepare at the individual level:
Think through each person’s story, including their current career stage, date
of last uplevel, and the size of their last salary increase.
Try to gauge what the person may be expecting based on this data and
anticipate how any compensation changes may align with or disappoint
those expectations.
Be prepared to own the message:
Be ready to move flexibly with the conversation. This may include a blend of
teaching, active listening, congratulating, or working through a tough
message.
If the person received a promotion or increase: Celebrate! Recognize the
person and reinforce the impact and behaviors they’ve demonstrated.
However, do not set the expectation that they will receive the same total
increase moving forward.
If a misalignment of expectations arises: Be ready for a reaction. Money
affects people personally, so it can be an emotional subject. Own the
results, even if the message is difficult or disappointing. Empathize and
listen, but be careful not to apologize or make promises about a future
outcome you can’t guarantee. Consider tying the outcome to performance
or another rationale, as needed.
Other tips: Remember to communicate even if there is no change in
compensation. If you don’t know the answer to a question, say that and
===== Book page 473 =====
offer to circle back once you’ve gathered more information.
Outline of a compensation discussion
Check for understanding:
Ask the person if they’ve reviewed and understand our philosophy. If the
answer is no, take a moment to explain it to them and refer them to
resources.
Answer any questions they have. If you’re not sure of the answer, commit to
coming back with an answer at a later date.
Describe the outcome of the process:
Remind them of their current compensation.
Share or affirm their base salary for the coming year. If there has been an
increase, celebrate it! Point to the critical work the person delivered and talk
about their positive trajectory. Highlight the areas for further development
you’re working on together. If there is no change, refer back to the program
design and, if appropriate, tie the compensation outcomes to performance
and the development areas you’re working on together.
Share their target bonus for the coming year. If there’s a change, highlight it.
Open it up for discussion:
Create space for questions.
Move with the conversation (congratulations, working through concerns,
etc.).
Reinforce that you value their contributions to the company and the team.
===== Book page 474 =====
Performance Improvement
Documentation Templates
Initial documentation of feedback after meeting
(1:1 and/or performance review of “partially meets expectations”)
[Name],
I wanted to recap what we discussed [yesterday/over the past few
weeks] in our [1:1/performance review].
We talked about you not currently meeting the expectations for [area of
development]. You have [summarize performance relative to expectation].
A few examples that we discussed related to these areas were:
[Example of not meeting expectations: the situation, the observable
behaviors, and the impact they had]
[Additional example of not meeting expectations]
In order to improve on the areas identified above and bring your
performance in line with the company’s expectations of you, you will need
to work on:
[Performance expectation expressed as an actionable next step]
[Additional performance expectation expressed as an actionable next
step]
If you focus your effort on these areas, I think you can quickly make the
necessary improvements. We’ll start checking in on these goals weekly
for the next [X] weeks, to make sure you’re continuing to improve in these
areas.
As your manager, I’m here to support you—please let me know how I can
help. My goal is to see you get back on track and succeed in your role
here!
===== Book page 475 =====
Progress update
[Name],
I’m following up to summarize what we discussed in our 1:1 yesterday with
regard to the areas of improvement to get you back on track.
[Restate performance expectation from initial feedback.]
You have [describe performance relative to expectation and provide
progress assessment]. Specifically, a few examples that demonstrate
progress are:
[Example related to progress: the situation, the observable behaviors,
and they impact they had]
[Additional example related to progress]
You should continue [doing X] and also [examples of what else they can
do].
[Restate performance expectation from initial feedback.]
As we discussed, [area of development] still needs to improve.
[Example of what behavior needs to change: the situation, the
observable behaviors, and the impact they had]
[Additional example of what behavior needs to change]
Please note again that [area of improvement] is a part of your core role,
and it is critical that you demonstrate this in order to meet expectations of
[ladder and level].
For both of these areas of development, we’ll continue to check in over
the next few weeks.
Employee getting back on track
===== Book page 476 =====
[Name],
Over the past [time period], we have talked about you improving your
performance in [area of development]. You have [summarize performance
relative to expectation]. A few recent examples related to these areas
were:
[Example of meeting expectations: the situation, the observable
behaviors, and the impact they had]
[Additional example of meeting expectations]
You have been demonstrating good progress, and I can confirm that you
are meeting performance expectations for your role and level. I expect
you to sustain this performance, and we’ll continue to monitor these areas
in our 1:1s.
It’s great to see you’re back on track!
Insufficient progress (after a reasonable period)
[Name],
Over the past [time period], we have talked about you not currently
meeting the expectations for [area of development]. You have [summarize
performance relative to expectation and the impact]. A few recent
examples related to these areas were:
[Example of not meeting expectations: the situation, the observable
behaviors, and the impact they had]
[Additional example of not meeting expectations]
I recognize that you have been putting in some additional effort. However,
I am concerned that these examples are further indication that the
feedback we’ve been discussing for the last several weeks has not been
addressed.
===== Book page 477 =====
At our next 1:1, I think we should realistically discuss whether you are
going to be able to meet performance expectations for [ladder and level].
I know this is difficult to hear, but I want to make sure that you understand
the situation.
Performance Improvement
Plan Template
Note: This template may need to be adapted for different geographical
jurisdictions.
A performance improvement plan (PIP) is a signed, standalone document that
outlines clear performance expectations for a person, identifying areas in need
of development and setting deadlines to measure success. The duration of a
PIP should provide a reasonable amount of time to fairly assess a person’s
performance against set metrics (typically four to six weeks). By the end of a
PIP, the person is either successfully meeting performance expectations for
their role and level or is likely transitioning out.
A PIP should not be the first time a person receives performance feedback. You
should have already had several documented conversations identifying areas
needing development, including providing examples of the person’s
performance gaps and offering support to empower them to meet expectations.
Performance improvement plan
Name:
Manager:
Date:
As we have previously discussed, and as outlined below, your
performance has not met expectations for your role and level. The goal of
===== Book page 478 =====
this performance improvement plan is to identify areas for development
and provide you with the opportunity to improve your performance. We
want you to have the tools and resources you need to perform at your
best and succeed.
Role expectations
You are expected to know, understand, and meet the performance
standards of your role. As a [role], we expect you to [main goal of role and
impact]. In order to achieve this, the following duties are an imperative
part of your success:
[Include 3–5 points summarizing key expectations for the role based
on job description, level, and ladder. These should specifically relate
to areas in need of improvement.]
Areas for improvement
Although you meet some of the skills and abilities of your role, there are
specific areas where you are not consistently meeting expectations.
Specifically, the following areas require immediate improvement:
Area of improvement 1
Description of expected standard and how this standard relates to
the company; consider operating principles
Description of gap or deficiency in relation to expectation (where is
the person falling short?) and what the impact is on the project or
team
Examples: Share specific, demonstrable examples of where the
employee has not met the expectation, including dates
Area of improvement 2
Description of expected standard
Description of gap or deficiency
Examples
Area of improvement 3
===== Book page 479 =====
Description of expected standard
Description of gap or deficiency
Examples
Improvement goals and targets
To help you form an action plan to improve your performance in the areas
listed above, I’ve created specific goals and targets that I expect you to
meet during the course of this PIP. In order to pass this PIP, you must
accomplish the following goals:
Area of improvement 1
Goal and time frame: What do you want to see the person accomplish
and when? What does success look like?
Deliverable: What is the expectation for improvement? How will the
person demonstrate that they have accomplished this goal?
Area of improvement 2
Goal and time frame
Deliverable
Area of improvement 3
Goal and time frame
Deliverable
Milestones
In the PIP period, I expect you to complete the following projects within
the deadlines provided:
[Project 1] by [deadline]
[Project 2] by [deadline]
[Project 3] by [deadline]
Resources
===== Book page 480 =====
We are committed to helping you achieve these improvement goals and
targets, meet expectations, and pass this PIP.
I am available to help you prioritize and remove or navigate any blockers
that you encounter during the PIP. Please note that while there are a
variety of resources available to you, you are expected to take initiative
and demonstrate self-direction when pursuing the goals set out in this
PIP.
If you feel that you need additional support or training in a particular area
during the PIP, please raise this with me so that we can discuss the best
way forward. I encourage you to take advantage of educational resources
such as [insert relevant links] to build your skill set. Please also feel free
to reach out to your HR partner, [name], if you need additional support or
guidance.
Progress checks and evaluation
We will meet every week to discuss your progress against the PIP. Please
keep notes and records of your accomplishments and any blockers so
that we can discuss them.
We will evaluate your success in the PIP in [X] weeks, at the conclusion of
this PIP on [date]. Please note, however, that I may terminate the PIP at
any time prior to its conclusion. The fact that you have entered into a PIP
for [X] weeks in no way guarantees employment for that period of time.
This PIP does not change the at-will nature of your employment, meaning
that you or the company may terminate your employment at any time for
any reason, with or without notice.
Given the duration and seriousness of your performance deficiencies,
failure to successfully meet the expectations outlined in this PIP may
result in termination of your employment. If you successfully complete the
PIP, please note that you must maintain this level of performance moving
forward, and further underperformance may result in termination of your
employment without a further PIP.
Summary
This performance improvement plan is an important time for you to focus
on your areas for development and demonstrate that you are able to meet
all of the performance expectations for your role. I am committed to being
clear in my feedback and guidance to you in order to provide you with the
===== Book page 481 =====
□
□
□
□
□
□
best opportunity for success at this company. Please feel free to reach
out to me at any time with questions you have about the process.
I have read this performance improvement plan, discussed it with my
manager, and understand the information and expectations it includes.
Employee signature
Manager signature
Managing Out Checklist
Provide feedback on performance issues.
Document the feedback.
If relevant, run a formal performance improvement
process.
Familiarize yourself with local employment
regulations.
Inform your manager and your HR partner, if you
have one.
Hold the coaching-out conversation with your
report.
===== Book page 482 =====
□
□
Agree on the timeline for leaving and the
communication plan.
Announce the departure to your team or
organization and any transition plan details if their
role requires immediate coverage.
===== Book page 483 =====
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.
Notes
Lewis, “Bill Parcells.”
Ben Horowitz, “Peacetime CEO/Wartime CEO,” Future, April 14, 2011,
https://future.a16z.com/peacetime-ceo-wartime-ceo/.
Stephen M. R. Covey and Rebecca R. Merrill, The Speed of Trust: The One Thing That
Changes Everything (New York: Free Press, 2006).
Ray Dalio, Principles (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2017).
Such as Sigma Assessment Systems’ 9-Box Grid,
https://www.sigmaassessmentsystems.com/9-box-grid/.
One Stripe engineer recently let me know that she found our initial engineering job
ladder disempowering. Her feedback was that the ladder should focus on outcomes
rather than a list of skills or inputs. For example, an L3 engineer should be able to
scope a project, coordinate among peers, and drive an improvement to the product and
the underlying code independently, from start to finish. I wholeheartedly agreed with
her criticism. In a company filled with motivated individuals who specialize in
problem-solving, avoid being too prescriptive with your expectations, and use your
performance guidance to motivate people and teams to accomplish high-impact
outcomes, not tick boxes on a checklist. Stripe’s job ladders continue to evolve based
on comments like the one this engineer shared with me.
Culture Amp’s “10 Performance Review Biases and How to Avoid Them” is a helpful
resource, https://www.cultureamp.com/blog/performance-review-bias.
“Pareto Principle,” Wikipedia, last modified January 21, 2022,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pareto_principle.
Scott, Radical Candor, 32–33.
“Five Whys,” Wikipedia, last modified February 2, 2022,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Five_whys.
OceanofPDF.com
