===== Book page 419 =====
clearer path to the next level. You can’t make them any promises, but
you can refer to the job ladder and be more specific about what
capabilities they’ll need to demonstrate in order to be promoted.
Commit to working with them on this path. Then, refocus the
discussion around their development opportunities and the chance
to increase their impact and receive the accompanying rewards in
the months to come.
Every company should have these basic people processes—
performance feedback, calibration, and compensation—in place
fairly early on. Once you exceed 20 or 30 employees is a good time
to get started. Again, the manager’s job is to understand those
processes and participate effectively so that your employees are
assessed and rewarded fairly—meaning appropriately for their
contributions at their level—within the system you’ve built.
Managing high performers
Managing extraordinary employees can be both the most rewarding
and the most demanding part of a manager’s job. Naturally, every
company hopes to hire, develop, and retain high performers. I
recently met a CFO who applied the 80-20 rule to talent,
maintaining that 20 percent of employees do 80 percent of the work.
I’m not sure it’s quite the Pareto principle,74 but he was right that top
performers pull more than their weight. What makes them top
performers is often their ambition and motivation and the ensuing
impact on their coworkers. It’s in their nature to be demanding—
mostly of themselves, but often of others, too. Managing a high
performer can take more energy because they exert and demand
more energy from those around them.
To manage high performers, you first need to understand what
drives them and how they operate. (Build mutual self-awareness!)

===== Book page 420 =====
Then you can work on helping them thrive on your teams.
Pushers and pullers
High performers tend to fall into two groups, which I call pushers
and pullers. Some will fall into both categories at different times.
Pushers are highly ambitious, and they’re often critical. They’re
quick to recognize when something is broken in an organization and
set high standards for themselves and those they work with. Pushers
reliably use performance reviews as an opportunity to ask why they
aren’t getting a larger raise or being entrusted with more
responsibility. They’re internally motivated and don’t care too much
about ruffling feathers. And yes, they will push you as their manager.
Pullers are the types of high performers who will take on much
more work than they should. Leaders and managers love them for
projects because they know that pullers will almost always agree to
work on something and deliver high-quality output. But pullers get
burned out. They suffer silently and won’t tell you they’re unhappy
until the 1:1 where they tell you they’re quitting. They derive a lot of
their self-worth from external validation and usually want to be
liked. They have trouble saying no.
To state the obvious: You want high performers on your team. To
state 
the 
less 
obvious: 
Great 
employees 
can 
have 
a
disproportionately positive impact on your company, but they can
also have a disproportionately negative impact on your company.
Pushers can be so demanding that they refuse to help develop talent
that has potential, which can demoralize others. Pullers can become
such automatic go-tos for important projects that other employees
don’t get a chance to develop and contribute to high-priority work,
and thus feel unnoticed by leadership. The manager’s challenge is to
nurture the best version of each high performer but also to make

===== Book page 421 =====
sure those high performers are positively impacting the entire
environment, not just their own work.
Pushers
At their best, pushers:
Get better results from teammates and organizations.
Model good work and motivate others.
Have a knack for identifying top talent and attracting them to
their projects or teams.
Have a sharp radar for things that aren’t working in the
organization.
Act like owners of the company and don’t stop at team
boundaries.
At their worst, pushers:
Have an all-or-nothing understanding of what constitutes “good”
and “bad” talent, in which a definition of “good” is reserved for a
very small proportion of all-stars.
Write off people they’ve placed in the “bad” talent bucket and
refuse to work with or develop them.
Inspire a feeling of distrust in others, who feel that their own
work is not being acknowledged or that they’re being put under
unfair pressure to perform at the same level.
Focus on bringing work into their team or organization at the
expense of developing internal talent, becoming what I call
empire builders.
To support pushers:
Encourage and reward them for the high standards they set.
Praise them, publicly and privately, for their work. Promote them.

===== Book page 422 =====
Give them raises.
Work with them to identify top talent and give that talent
opportunities.
Work with them to identify areas in the organization that need
attention. You may ask them to lead projects to address those
areas.
Help them develop others. If you frame this as a development
area, pushers will often jump at the opportunity to get better at
it. Talk to them about appreciating the strengths in others
instead of just their faults.
Highlight that in order to scale, they have to learn how to exert
influence indirectly and cannot take all the work into their team.
Coach them on how to delegate work and build mutual trust.
Pullers
At their best, pullers:
Are great resources to lead high-priority projects.
Can jump into urgent work that needs to be done well.
Model high-quality work.
Are a motivating force for the rest of the organization.
Demonstrate energy and commitment and are fun to have on a
team.
At their worst, pullers:
Burn out.
Take on work that’s not the best use of their time or skills.
Don’t delegate work that could help others develop.
Can be a demotivating force to others because they get all of the
best projects.
To support pullers:

===== Book page 423 =====
Help them prioritize and set boundaries around their work.
Before they take on work, encourage them to ask themselves: Am
I the most qualified person to be doing this work? Is this the
most important thing I can be working on? What would I have to
let go of to take on this work?
Help them find their own interests and passions rather than
simply executing on the work handed to them. (See the section
on career conversations on page 283.)
Coach them on how to turn down projects.
Assure them that turning down an invitation to work on a project
doesn’t mean they won’t have the opportunity to work on other
exciting efforts.
Help them identify other talent that can work on projects in their
stead, and focus them on delegating and developing others.
Here are some additional tactics that I’ve found helpful when I’ve
managed high performers:
Anticipate when the work will become boring
Productive individuals will be the first to feel the strain of work that
isn’t engaging. Don’t make the mistake of hoping your high
performer won’t notice that they’re bored. If you’re managing a
pusher, they will tell you this in every 1:1. But if you’re managing a
puller, they will likely be unhappy in silence. In either case, you’ll
want to show your report that you’re anticipating when they might
outgrow their role and that you want to actively generate exciting
projects for them to work on. Say the thing you think you cannot
say: “I’m worried we won’t have enough interesting projects for you
in six months.” Start jointly brainstorming work they would find
exciting, and if they can’t find it on your team, help them find it
elsewhere. That’s right: Help them find it elsewhere.

===== Book page 424 =====
I think one reason for any success I’ve had as a manager is that
I’ve always “played the person,” meaning I’ve put their own path at
the forefront, no matter the potential destination. Although I act and
make decisions for the good of the organization, when it comes to
individual development, I’ve sometimes found that the best
opportunities for some of my reports were outside of our team—
and, occasionally, outside of the company. As a manager, you hope
that this won’t come to pass, but you’d rather be the person who
helped your report think through the tough decision to leave than be
caught off guard by their resignation. And being honest with your
employees makes it more likely that they’ll come back to you. When
people say leaders inspire followership, it’s because great leaders
help people learn, support people’s success, and build trust that they
will do the right thing, for the company and for their team members
as individuals. Being honest about the opportunities you perceive
for your people helps you become the type of leader that talented
people want to follow.
Remember: There’s more opportunity than you think
Looking within your own team or organization, you have more
latitude to create opportunities for high performers than you might
think. For example:
Even if your team doesn’t have available management roles,
you can still give someone a significant leadership role.
Remember Operating Principle 3: Distinguish between
management and leadership. You can give them more strategic
projects within the team, delegate team-building work to them,
like hiring and planning, or have them take on important
infrastructural work, like designing the technical architecture for

===== Book page 425 =====
the next level of systems scale or leading the business review
process and presenting for your org.
Consider new organizational structures that give your
employees more latitude to grow. For example, instead of
having one large team responsible for a certain project, build
three smaller teams with different managers. Just don’t make
them too small. No “I” formations, please. In most cases, you
shouldn’t break your organization for an individual, but you can
often have your cake and eat it too.
Focus on the type of work, not the title. People can get
obsessive about job titles and consequently stop thinking about
the type of work they’re doing. Consult your notes from the
career conversation and think about the person’s future
aspirations. Catalog the types of experiences that might be
required for the role they hope to have in five years. If your report
wants a more general leadership position in the future and has
been doing a lot of strategic and data work, can you give them
work that is more operational or sales-oriented so that they can
gain a new skill set?
Consider whether they should have your job. Sometimes
you’ve outgrown your team and your high performer has
outgrown their role. This would be a good moment to consider
your succession plan, or even to place yourself outside your own
job in favor of someone new. I once spoke to someone who
worked in a people analytics role who shared that some of the
most interesting analysis she’d conducted was of top performers
getting “stuck” under a boss. You want a certain amount of
stability in your organization, but you also want healthy
movement, especially for the folks under the boss.
Let go

===== Book page 426 =====
If you can’t find interesting opportunities for a high performer on
your team, don’t hold on to them for too long. Stalling a high
performer will always come at the detriment of the longer-term
health of your relationship with the person and your team’s output.
Not only will unhappy employees perform poorly but your team will
also get a reputation for being a place where people can’t further
their careers.
Once you’ve reached this stage, do your best to land the high
performer in another part of the organization. It will be a win for
your company and a long-term win for you. If there really is no place
at your company for them, open up your network, play the person,
and bet on the long term. You’ll have earned the high performer’s
loyalty and trust.
Manage for potential, not experience
A good manager spends a lot more time with their high performers
than with their low performers. You’ve probably heard this
management tip before. It’s right, but it’s incomplete. You should be
focusing on the employees with the highest long-term return, not
just current high performers. If you have a report who is already a
clear high performer, you should help them be successful, unblock
them, and coach them to be even better. But you’ll have the most
impact by identifying the individuals who have great potential but
may lack the skills to achieve that potential. My favorite puzzle is
what I call “interesting” talent: a person with a lot of upside who has
an unusual mix of skills. How do you unlock the upside? Obsess
about 
it. 
Maybe 
it’s 
new 
projects, 
education 
courses,
apprenticeship… Figure out what they need and the reward will be
rich.
There’s a certain type of person I’ve managed that tends to be the
most creative: the person who has the off-the-wall idea or thinks

===== Book page 427 =====
about a problem from an entirely different angle than the rest of the
team. These folks can sometimes feel very disruptive, but they’re
often the ones who engineer the breakthrough your team was
seeking but couldn’t find. The key is to listen to them, help them vet
their ideas, then give them the freedom to pilot and test a theory.
Soon after Google launched Gmail, our support situation was a
disaster. Gmail introduced a lot of new concepts for online mail at
the time (threading email conversations!), and users were constantly
seeking support. Often, our team wouldn’t get back to them for days.
Google had never tried peer-to-peer support before, but one
member of my team constantly brought it up as our best bet. Finally,
I asked him to find an external example and write up a way for us to
test the concept. Soon enough, users were getting help immediately
instead of waiting days for support. This person’s idea allowed us to
build a new support approach for many Google products that’s still
in use today.
Conduct pre-exit interviews and retros
Identify your top 10 percent of talent and your highest potential
talent and interview them once a year. Ask them, “If you were going
to leave, what would be the reason?” Even if you’re time-
constrained, having just three to five of these conversations will be
very useful because you’ll learn about pain points in the company
pretty quickly. You’ll likely gain some feedback for yourself, too. At
the very least, you’ll be able to directly reassure these folks that
you’re aware of any improvements that need to be made and you can
outline plans to do so (if you have them). Even better, you can enlist
them in helping to address the issues that create the most friction
for their engagement and performance.
No one ever conducted a pre-exit interview with me, but there
was a moment in my career when, if asked, I would have said that

===== Book page 428 =====
one particular leader in my division had soured me on my job and
on the company. I took it upon myself to move to a new part of the
company, but no one ever knew why. Don’t miss out on that chance
to learn more. Your top 10–20 percent of performers make or break
your company, so spend as much time with them as you can. If you
lose someone, conduct an extensive retrospective to find out why.
Ask them why they’re leaving but also ask their close friends or
colleagues; usually they will be high performers as well. You’ll learn
a lot.
“Hopefully, people with important titles, like CEOs or
chancellors, are leaders. But you can be a leader without a
title, and I think that’s the most effective leadership—
when you’re actually an influencer of what’s happening
around you. People get to leadership positions with titles
because earlier in their career they were leaders without a
title.”
—Sam Hawgood, chancellor, University of California, San Francisco
Retaining top talent
The biggest mistake I’ve seen people make with regard to managing
high performers is when a manager thinks that top talent is “good
enough” and doesn’t challenge them to be even better. High
performers like feeling uncomfortable. They seek out the ski slopes
that are slightly too steep and revel in making it to the bottom
quicker than anyone else.
In terms of my own career, I think some of my success comes
down to two things. The first is being good at understanding the big
picture, anticipating what interesting work might emerge and
moving toward that work or those companies. As Wayne Gretzky
said and as many CEOs like to repeat, “Skate to where the puck is

===== Book page 429 =====
going to be, not where it has been.” The second is identifying and
unlocking the talents of top performers and giving them more
responsibility than anyone thought possible.
As you plan projects for your team, think about who is going to
work on those projects and whether they will be excited and
challenged by that work. Does your team have enough projects to
keep them excited for the next six months? What about for the next
year? If you’re working at a fast-growing company, you’ll have the
benefit of a fast-growing team, which hopefully means that
opportunities for high performers will arise naturally.
Even at high-growth companies, though, there will be teams
where the opportunities are capped. This is often the case for
specialized teams, like business development. These teams usually
attract talented individuals, but because they often stay small and
focus on projects with consistent inputs and outputs, there aren’t a
lot of obvious ways to challenge the team. Get ahead of this and help
your high performers think through the reality of that particular
team, both the positives and the downsides. In the example of a
small, strategic team like business development, the person might
get to work on trajectory-changing deals, but because the team is
small, they’ll have less of a chance to become a people manager, at
least in the near term. Say the thing you think you cannot say by
talking explicitly about the trade-offs and being an honest coach for
their career. Worst case, you help them move to another team where
they might gain management experience more quickly. Best case,
they actively choose to stay on their current team, and they know
why they made that decision and what they hope to contribute and
get out of it.
Telling a high performer they won’t be promoted

===== Book page 430 =====
It’s very easy to promote people too quickly—after all, you want to
reward them for their great work. But you need to make sure to do a
gut check and ask yourself whether the person is truly performing at
the next level and can sustain that performance. Everyone has
development areas, and the best thing you can do for your high
performer is to highlight those areas. If they’re truly a high
performer, they’ll appreciate you for it and work all the harder to
improve.
If you’ve decided that your top talent isn’t ready for a promotion,
own it. Tell them what they’re still missing (refer to the coaching and
feedback sections earlier in this chapter) and what needs to change
for them to make it to the next level. I recently worked with an
extremely talented person who, based on her own direct
contributions, absolutely deserved to be promoted, but she had not
yet figured out how to build and scale her team through her direct
reports as opposed to through her own individual talent. I gave her
this feedback during her performance review, and we spent six
months strategizing about hiring, delegating, and operating her team
for scaled impact. As we reached that next performance review
cycle, the leadership team agreed that she was ready to be promoted.
She was also ready to excel at her new level.
In some cases, you may have been giving the top performer a lot
of positive feedback but haven’t done the work to give them
constructive feedback until the performance review cycle. This isn’t
ideal, but if that happens, tell them honestly, “You’re doing well, but
I should have given you more constructive feedback on X. It’s my
fault that we haven’t had this conversation earlier.” You’re going to
lose a bit of trust, but if you own up to your misstep, you should be
able to rebuild the trust together.

===== Book page 431 =====
Finally, if you’re working at a high-growth company where
employees are frequently promoted, make sure to continuously set
expectations. The more senior someone becomes, the less often
they’ll be promoted, so you’ll have to find different ways to
recognize them beyond relying on promotions.
The steady middle
There is one school of thought that “medium” performers are just
people who haven’t yet shown their true abilities (or lack thereof).
That can be true when the company is growing quickly and a lot of
people are new, but given enough time, I believe you will see the
entire normal curve of performance: high, medium, and low. Yes, a
company can skew to a slightly higher-performing talent
distribution, but I think you’d be hard pressed to find a company
that’s full of the upper tail, especially a big one.
It’s easy to neglect medium performers. That’s particularly
unfortunate because they’re often sources of stability, and many are
culture carriers. Every manager should consider their team as a
portfolio of talent, and each person in that talent portfolio should be
assessed and either supported, coached to better performance, or
moved into a more suitable role, team, or company.
Consider your team’s context: Is it a fast-paced team with an
ever-changing scope of work that’s critical to the company’s top
priorities, or is it a team that must deliver similar work, consistently
well, in a more predictable cycle year after year? The latter type of
team might be better suited to medium performers, and those
medium performers should have development plans and be
recognized for their contributions. It should also be okay for people
to reach a “terminal” level, meaning they might not get promoted
beyond, say, Level 4. Provided they’re contributing well, you should

===== Book page 432 =====
allow for that stasis, seek their feedback on how to improve the
team, and take time to celebrate their consistent performance—
which may look less like compensation rewards and more like verbal
recognition and special assignments.
Managing low performers
Sometimes you’ll notice that the one-off constructive feedback
you’ve given a report has become a pattern. When there’s a
persistent gap between a report’s performance and the demands and
expectations of their role, you’re managing a low performer.
First things first: A low performer isn’t always a low performer.
It’s all about the context. Maybe there’s a skill or will issue, or maybe
they’re in the wrong job. Your job is to figure that out and identify
whether there’s a performance issue, then either improve it or move
the person out of your team or company.
Back to stating the obvious: A person with a pattern of low
performance—again, within your team context; this is not a
judgment on them as a person—is primarily a problem for two
reasons. First, the low quality of their work and output impacts the
overall quality of your team’s work and output. Second, low
performers are usually an enormous drag on the rest of the team and
can be pernicious underminers of morale. If great management is
about amplifying your team’s impact and bolstering their
commitment and motivation to continue to do great work, I’d argue
that handling low performers is some of the most critical work you
can do outside of maintaining the operating system.
By the time you’ve identified a low performer, your organization
has already expended a big cost on recruiting, hiring, and
onboarding that person, especially if they’re in a senior-level role.

===== Book page 433 =====
Your goal should be to help the employee be successful at your
company, or to make a decision and help them move on quickly.
What follows are some principles for managing low performers,
followed by steps to help you get the employee back on track or
manage their move or departure. But first, I want to raise two points
to keep in mind as you’re reading through this section regarding
edge cases and the role of HR in this process.
Edge cases
Performance issues aren’t always the result of lack of skill or will.
Any number of difficult things may be happening in your employees’
personal lives—the loss of a family member, financial hardship,
physical or mental health issues—that could impact their
performance at work.
It’s tricky to provide one-size-fits-all advice here, but it’s helpful
to do two things in these sorts of situations. First, if you can, involve
your HR team. There are, rightly, protections in place for employees
who are struggling in other parts of their lives, and you should be
aware of the legal and regulatory requirements to support them.
Second, don’t back away from feedback. With any low-performing
employee, there’s a gap between their performance and what the
role demands. You can’t lower the expectations of the role, but you
can make changes to the employee’s responsibilities by moving them
to a part-time or less demanding role, particularly if the difficult
situation is temporary.
The role of HR teams
If your company has an HR team, they will be a great resource for
managing low performers. If you don’t have an HR team, you likely
have a lawyer or law firm on retainer. These firms can often provide
materials or trainings on local legal considerations, and it’s worth

===== Book page 434 =====
asking to access them. An experienced HR person will have seen
many situations like yours and can help you identify areas of risk
that vary by country, like potential legal exposure and regulatory
requirements.
Once you’ve identified that one of your team members is a low
performer, make sure to let your HR team know. But don’t ask your
HR team to do the performance management on your behalf. As the
manager, you are ultimately responsible for your reports and their
performance. You know their work best, and you are the leader of
your team.
Now, on to the key principles for managing low performers:
No surprises
If your employee walks into a 1:1 and is surprised to learn that
you’re putting them on a formal performance improvement plan,
you’ve done something wrong. By the time those bigger decisions
have been made, you and the employee should have had at least two
or three feedback conversations in which you’ve discussed their
performance and, importantly, explicitly stated that their work is not
meeting the expectations of the role. Done right, these conversations
probably started as hypothesis-based coaching moments and turned
into a more explicit sharing of concerns, for example “I’m worried
you won’t be able to meet your goals for this quarter.”
If you haven’t done this, you’re starting from behind. You’ll have
to spend significant time getting on the same page with your report
to explain the decision. They’ll also no longer trust you, and it’s less
likely you’ll be able to remediate the issue. This is why you can’t
hold off on giving your reports any measure of feedback, and it’s
why I recommend prioritizing feedback over almost any other
management practice, especially for employees who seem to be
missing the mark.

===== Book page 435 =====
There are exceptions to the “no surprises” rule, like when a team
member has done a one-off thing that’s so egregious that it calls for
immediate action. But in most cases, you’re looking at a pattern of
performance issues over time—but not too long a time—and you
should have had ample opportunity to point out the problems.
Waiting for your company’s formal performance assessment process
to deliver feedback to a low performer is a mistake. Provide
feedback, especially on a performance issue, early and often.
Use documentation to foster clarity and trust
Document your feedback. Managers are sometimes reluctant to put
their critical observations in writing, but constructive feedback is an
important management tool that you shouldn’t try to couch in vague
language or throw in as an aside during a hallway chat. You’re giving
someone feedback because you want them to hear it—and if you
want them to hear it, putting the observation in writing can help in a
number of ways. For one thing, it reduces the chance that something
gets lost in translation. For another, it can help both you and the
employee uncover patterns more quickly and easily. It also helps you
build trust, because you then have a written record of what was
discussed and agreed on. Although this won’t be necessary in the
vast majority of cases, a written record of your discussions is also
important if an employee decides to take legal action.
Try to provide feedback in person, ideally during a regularly
scheduled 1:1, but follow up with the feedback in writing. If the
feedback is one-off, document it in your 1:1 meeting document (for
example, “Agenda item 2: feedback on the analysis you produced last
week”). Write down the main points from the discussion, including
how you’re going to help the employee and what they’re going to do
to improve. If you’re having more serious conversations about a
pattern of underperformance, record your feedback and discussion

===== Book page 436 =====
in an email or a document that you send to the employee. If you’re in
a more serious performance situation, you should have notified HR
already, and you should be sharing the documented feedback with
your HR contact as well.
Show compassion
If you’re an empathetic manager—and many great managers are—
managing a low performer can be difficult because you acutely feel
the risk of hurting a person’s feelings and damaging their
confidence. Managers should always manage compassionately, but
compassionate management is not what many people do. Many
managers think they’re being compassionate by being nice when in
fact they’re making matters worse on all sides. In her book Radical
Candor, Kim Scott calls this “ruinous empathy.”75 I wholeheartedly
agree.
Compassionate management does not mean holding off on giving
feedback because you notice the employee is already overwhelmed
or prone to taking feedback badly. It also doesn’t mean dropping
your other work to get the person back on track. Compassionate
management means providing someone with honest observations of
their performance, being clear about the options an employee has to
course-correct, outlining what work would be required for them to
start meeting expectations, and sharing what you think is the
likeliest outcome for them at your organization. It also means
balancing all of this feedback with your other responsibilities. I once
had a coach point out that the biggest mistake she observes
managers making is spending all of their time on the problems and
not enough on fueling top performers. To correct this, address the
problem situations more directly and efficiently, and use your
recaptured time to invest in high-potential talent.

===== Book page 437 =====
Move deliberately
In performance management, timing is everything. Ideally, it takes
no more than three months to reach a resolution for any given
performance issue. In many cases, issues can be resolved in one
month, depending on the employee’s seniority and the context. You
don’t want to let issues linger, but you also want to give the person a
fair chance to improve.
Another complication with waiting to address a performance
issue is that the longer you wait, the more variables are introduced
into the performance equation. For example, an employee often
knows they’re not doing well even if you haven’t discussed the issue
directly. They become stressed, which also impacts their
performance. When you finally talk to them about the issue, they
might say, “Actually, I’ve been experiencing extreme anxiety these
past three months.” Suddenly you’re in a situation that involves their
mental health, which completely changes your performance
management conversations and likely delays the process. This could
have been avoided had you worked through the process more
quickly.
Phases of managing low performers
Managing low performers can feel like an up-and-down process
that’s difficult to track, so I’ve broken it down into a few phases,
with a rough timeline for each. The process can be faster if the
employee agrees on the issue and chooses to leave sooner. This is a
key point: Having to officially fire someone is a rare occurrence.
Most of the time, management of a low performer involves coaching
or “managing out” an individual who independently decides to move
on, at which point you mutually manage the communications and

===== Book page 438 =====
transition accompanying their role change or departure. And that’s a
great outcome in a low-performance situation.
The phases of managing low performers are:
Phase 0: Your one-off feedback becomes a pattern; form a
hypothesis on the outcome (less than three weeks).
Phase 1: Get aligned about the performance challenge (one to three
conversations, two weeks).
Share your observations about the pattern.
Communicate that the employee is not meeting expectations for
their role.
Document your discussion.
Phase 2: Agree on next steps (one to two conversations, one week).
Phase 3: Create an action plan (one to three months).
Potential outcome 1: Follow a performance improvement plan;
the employee’s performance improves.
Potential outcome 2: Move the employee to another team.
Potential outcome 3: Employee leaves the company.
In this section, I’ll outline and explore each of these phases.
Where applicable, I’ll also provide some language to help you frame
the conversations you may have with a low-performing employee.
Phase 0: Your one-off feedback becomes a pattern; form a
hypothesis on the outcome
Once you realize that your one-off feedback reflects persistent
underperformance with no visible improvement, you need to start
planning for a longer performance management process. If the
person is a junior employee and their role is quite straightforward,

===== Book page 439 =====
this process can happen fairly quickly. If the role is complex and the
person is quite experienced and senior, perhaps a manager of
managers, this process is probably going to take a few months. As
you think about the likely outcome, bake in a timeline and hold
yourself accountable to it.
This may be counterintuitive, but it’s critical to develop a
hypothesis on what you think the outcome will be before you start
the process. Your hypothesis might be wrong, and you should adjust
it as you get more data. But I strongly believe that by having a
potential outcome in mind you will facilitate a better process and
series of conversations. There are three likely outcomes:
1. The employee improves and stays in the role.
2. The employee changes roles or teams.
3. The employee leaves the company.
Starting with a hypothesis about the most likely outcome will
help you communicate expectations. In my experience, once you
outline a performance improvement plan, employees will often ask,
“Do you think I can succeed?” I would never give a flat-out no, but if
warranted, I would definitely say, “I think it’s going to be hard.” Or
you can say, “I’m worried that you won’t be able to acquire the skills
quickly enough to meet the requirements of your current role. I’m
here to help, but I want to be honest about my concerns.” In that
case, the person may already agree, and then you can transition into
a conversation about a potential departure or a different role. If they
decide to pursue the improvement plan, they may prove you wrong
(and you can adjust your hypothesis). But if they don’t, you’ve
already laid the groundwork for the next step.
Phase 1: Get aligned about the performance challenge

===== Book page 440 =====
Once you’ve formed your hypothesis on the likely outcome, use a
regularly scheduled 1:1 to deliver your feedback. How you deliver the
feedback should be similar to one-off feedback (see the section on
giving hard feedback on page 355), but with two important
additions:
1. State that you are now seeing a pattern.
2. Explain that this means the employee is not meeting the
expectations of the role. Ideally, you’ll reference an objective
source on role expectations, like a role charter, when you do this.
The latter is particularly important. You’re moving from an
informal coaching mode to a more formal performance designation.
This is crucial. Don’t assume an employee understands that they are
officially not meeting expectations until you tell them so explicitly.
This can be a tricky moment, so I’ve outlined some ways to
articulate this kind of feedback over the next few pages.
Delivering the feedback
You can start by saying something like “I’ve noticed that you’ve
missed your deadline for a project three times. We talked about the
need to meet deadlines in the past, and now I think this is starting to
look like a bad pattern. I’m concerned that you are no longer
meeting expectations for this role.”
The employee will usually respond in one of two ways: with
denial (“I disagree”), or with relief and a readiness to problem-solve
(“I think you’re right, and I need help”).
Response 1: denial
If you’ve hired well, this should only be a small percentage (say, 10
percent) of responses. There are a few ways the conversation could
proceed.

===== Book page 441 =====
If you believe the person is misunderstanding or not grasping the
situation, give them more examples of the behavior and make sure
they hear that you’re concerned. You can say, “I’m talking about the
missed deadline last week and the one on project X a week or so
before that.” You might add, “It’s also clear that your team is feeling
a lack of delivery on promises, based on what they wrote in your
peer reviews.”
If they’re disputing the facts, steer the discussion away from the
facts and toward your perception and observation of their
performance. You can say, “Even if you don’t completely agree, let’s
talk about the perception that you miss deadlines. We need to work
on that issue.” Or, “I have personally observed that you miss some
deadlines, and I want to focus on how that happened and what we
can do to improve.”
Depending on how the employee reacts, you may need to have
this conversation over a few meetings. Sometimes they get upset
with you, sometimes they just need some time to process, or
sometimes they tell you something that shifts your perspective. If
that happens, don’t be afraid to pause and set up a new time to chat.
When you do this, don’t back away. You still believe the feedback is
true, and you’ll undo all your work if you don’t own the feedback.
You can say, “It seems like I have some observations that you don’t
agree with. I can see that you may need some time to process them.
Why don’t we pause the conversation to think about the discussion,
and I can set up some more time for us in the next few days.”
If you’ve learned something new about the employee and their
situation—for example, perhaps another team missed a critical
delivery date that impacted this person’s deadline—and believe you
might have been wrong about your initial assessment, you should
end the conversation with an agreement that you’re going to gather

===== Book page 442 =====
more data and will check back in. You can say, “Thank you for
sharing this new information. Let me dig into this, and I’ll set up
some time to continue the conversation next week.” Don’t let this
linger for longer than a week. After considering this new
information, you will either still believe that this is a performance
situation and restart the review process, or you’ll want to debrief
with the employee about why you had mistaken information or
feedback about their performance.
Response 2: relief and a readiness to problem-solve
Most of the time, people will have heard your coaching and will
already know that something isn’t right before you have the more
formal feedback conversation. This is great news because it means
you agree that there’s a problem that needs to be solved. You can
then get into problem-solving mode by asking some or all the
following questions, directly or indirectly, depending on the context
and the person:
What do you think is going on? The person may volunteer a
personal situation that needs to be addressed or offer up an area
where they need help. (“I just don’t have strong enough Excel
skills.”) They may even share that they’re unsure they’re a fit for
the role. You’re looking for them to lay out the path, and you
should continue the conversation down that path, especially if
you agree with their assessment or remediation. Take advantage
of the moment to probe further. You may reach an agreement
that this is not the right role for them.
Do you like this work? If they know that they’re not succeeding
in the role but aren’t sure why, it’s time to dig deeper. Maybe
you’ll get them thinking and they’ll realize that the aspect of their
job they like the least represents a skill they need to develop

===== Book page 443 =====
further. Or perhaps they’ll realize that they don’t like the role at
all and should make a change.
Is this the right role for you? In the vein of saying the thing you
think you cannot say, sometimes it’s most effective to voice this
concern directly if you have it. I wouldn’t start here, but if the
person is struggling to talk about the positives of the role and if
you’re both unable to match their interests and strengths with
the current role and only see gaps to be filled, it may be time to
confront the main issue.
Once you’ve had this discussion, you will have a clearer sense of
whether your hypothesis was correct and you can move on to the
next steps.
Document your discussion
Make sure to document each discussion you have in this process.
The best way to do this is via email because it provides an easy way
for you to push information to the employee and for them to
respond. Your email should state that the employee is currently not
meeting the expectations of the role and outline the agreed-upon
next steps, even if they’re as simple as “You’re going to reflect on the
conversation and we’ll meet again next week.”
Your email can say something like:
Thanks again for the discussion today. I wanted to send
over notes from our conversation so that we have our
discussion captured in one place.
We discussed that your analytical skills from Projects X
and Y aren’t meeting the bar for your role right now. As
next steps, we agreed that I’m going to send you two
training videos on writing SQL queries (attached) and put

===== Book page 444 =====
you in touch with Bob, who can give you some more ideas on
how to get up to speed on analytics. You’re going to
complete the analytical work for Project Z, which you’ll
share at our 1:1 next month, and we’ll review how things
have improved.
See the chapter appendix on page 418 for more email templates to
document the performance improvement process.
Phase 2: Agree on next steps
Once you’ve had the conversation about performance issues, you’re
ideally on the same page about what’s happening and have aligned
on which path the process will take. For example, you might end
your second feedback meeting with a joint conclusion like “We
agree that I’ll write up a performance improvement plan on the
areas we discussed, and we’ll track your progress on that plan over
the next 30 days.”
Even if you aren’t fully aligned, you need to start moving on to
discussing next steps by the third conversation. This might mean
that you conclude a meeting with something like “Even though you
don’t completely agree that a formal performance improvement plan
is needed, I’m going to write up a plan and we’ll track your progress
against that plan over the next 30 days.”
As I mentioned earlier, there are three potential next steps:
1. Follow a performance improvement plan.
2. Move the employee to another team.
3. The employee leaves the company.
In the next section, I’ll focus on the first two outcomes. The
section on managing out, firing, and layoffs later in this chapter will
cover situations where it’s time for someone to leave the company.

===== Book page 445 =====
Phase 3: Create an action plan
Potential outcome 1: Agree on and execute a performance
improvement plan
If your initial conversation has not resulted in a quick mutual
decision for the employee to depart, then a formal performance
improvement plan (sometimes called a PIP) should be drafted by the
manager and then agreed to by the direct report. It should include:
The skills or behaviors that need to change and what
improvements you need to see
An end date, at which point you’ll evaluate the employee’s
improvement
How you’re going to measure progress
Performance issues tend to be addressed by three types of fixes,
and the duration of the improvement plan needs to take into account
the nature of the issue:
Operational or tactical: This can include improving analytical
skills, meeting sales quotas, or increasing the quality and
quantity of support responses. These are the easiest changes to
observe or measure, but they can take time to take shape.
Someone with a sales quota, for example, may need additional
time to show improvement because most sales deals close by the
end of a set period, usually a quarter.
Overall skills fit for the role: For instance, you might need
someone who is a specialist in analytical work, but the person is
much more of a general athlete for the building stage. You should
be able to assess within one to two months whether the person
has the will and the raw characteristics to evolve into what the
role requires, even if the actual skill building will take longer than

===== Book page 446 =====
that. Sometimes you need someone with those skills in the role
immediately, in which case you can make the assessment even
more quickly.
Behavioral or attitudinal: For example, you might be managing
an employee who is used to a very hierarchical structure and
receiving clear instructions on their work product, but your
company is more of a flat organization where people need to be
self-directed. You should be able to see whether someone is able
and willing to develop and operate in your company environment
within two or three weeks.
The hardest part of writing the formal performance improvement
plan is detailing how you’re going to measure progress. For a
metrics-based issue the measurement will be obvious, but otherwise
you’re going to have to rely on the what—work output and quality—
and 
the 
how—work 
process, 
including 
collaboration 
and
communication with others. Make sure you outline how you will
determine output, quality, and process. This might mean seeking
peer feedback from five people on the team or asking another
manager who has depth in their domain to assess a piece of work.
Whatever it is, try to avoid a situation where you and your employee
reach the end of the performance improvement plan period and are
in dispute about how to assess their progress.
Sample conversation introducing the performance improvement
plan
These conversations can be difficult on both sides, so take care in
preparing for them. Modify these talking points in a way that feels
comfortable for you, but make sure you cover the main topics:

===== Book page 447 =====
As we have discussed, your current performance is not
meeting the expectations of your role. In particular, your
primary areas of improvement include [list areas of
improvement highlighted in the PIP; provide clarification
by summarizing the examples you’ve shared in the PIP
outlining specific occasions where the person has failed
to meet expectations].
To help you get back on track, I’ve prepared a performance
improvement plan. The goal of this PIP is to clearly lay
out our expectations of you and to build a framework for
you to meet these expectations. Your goals during the PIP
period will be [list the achievements or milestones
provided in the PIP].
I appreciate that this is not easy to hear, but let’s view
this as a development opportunity. I’m committed to using
this plan to help improve your performance. We’ll touch
base on the plan every week during our regular 1:1s and
we’ll spend time discussing your progress against each of
these goals. Let me know if you feel you need more 1:1
time.
It’s definitely possible to meet the goals of the PIP.
However, if you don’t demonstrate that you meet the
expectations of your role during the PIP, your employment
may be terminated.
Do you have any questions about the PIP or about this
process?
See the chapter appendix on page 422 for a sample PIP template.

===== Book page 448 =====
Once you’ve completed the performance improvement plan with
the employee, you’ll either determine that the person has performed
sufficiently well and you can close out the performance plan, or
you’ll find that your employee hasn’t grown to meet the demands of
the role and you’ll determine that changing roles or teams or leaving
the company is necessary.
In my experience, cases where the employee has refused to
believe the feedback and thus the PIP serves as a formal way to
demonstrate the gap will conclude with the employee exiting the
company 99 percent of the time. The other case is where the
employee understands the gap and is motivated to learn the
necessary skills or change how they approach their work. The more
tactical the skill gap, the more likely they are to be able to meet the
PIP if they’re sufficiently motivated. If the skill gap is more nuanced
or the issue is more behavioral, it will be harder for them to succeed,
but I have seen it happen. The manager’s role is always to support
the person through this process, but it’s also important to keep an
eye on the degree of difficulty, the employee’s motivation level, and
your hypothesis about the outcome. Sadly, I’ve seen too many
instances where an employee squeaks by the requirements of a PIP
only to find themselves in the same situation a few months later.
This isn’t good for the manager, the team, or the employee.
Potential outcome 2: Move roles or teams
It may be the case that you think someone is a great worker but just
isn’t right for their current role. As a manager, you can use
hypothesis-based coaching to help identify what roles are a better fit
for their skills and interests, then help the person figure out what
other opportunities are available at your company and how to seek
them out.
